RESEARCH ARTICLE Zunpu HAN, Y ong W ANG, De TIAN Ant colony optimization for assembly sequence planning based on parameters optimization © Higher Education Press 2021 Abstract As an important part of product design and manufacturing, assembly sequence planning (ASP) has a considerable impact on product quality and manufacturing costs. ASP is a typical NP-complete problem that requires effective methods to ﬁnd the optimal or near-optimal assembly sequence. First, multiple assembly constraints and rules are incorporated into an assembly model. The assembly constraints and rules guarantee to obtain a reasonable assembly sequence. Second, an algorithm called SOS-ACO that combines symbiotic organisms search (SOS) and ant colony optimization (ACO) is proposed to calculate the optimal or near-optimal assembly sequence. Several of the ACO parameter values are given, and the remaining ones are adaptively optimized by SOS. Thus, the complexity of ACO parameter assignment is greatly reduced. Compared with the ACO algorithm, the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm ﬁnds optimal or near-optimal assembly sequences in fewer iterations. SOS-ACO is also robust in identifying the best assembly sequence in nearly every experiment. Lastly, the performance of SOS-ACO when the given ACO parameters are changed is analyzed through experiments. Experimental results reveal that SOS-ACO has good adaptive capability to various values of given parameters and can achieve competitive solutions. Keywords assembly sequence planning, ant colony optimization, symbiotic organisms search, parameter optimization 1 Introduction In modern manufacturing, the assembly process accounts for 20%–50% of the entire production time, and more than 40% of the cost is used for product assembly [1]. The quality of the assembly sequence directly affects manu- facturing costs and product ef ﬁciency. The automatic generation and optimization of assembly sequences are crucial in ensuring product competitiveness and pro ﬁt- ability [2]. Therefore, assembly sequence planning (ASP) has become a focus of research on product manufacturing. ASP is a typical NP-complete problem under assembly process constraints [3], and it aims to identify the optimal or near-optimal assembly sequences among a large number of assembly sequences to reduce the assembly cost and improve assembly ef ﬁciency [4,5]. Currently, two main types of methods, namely, exact and heuristic algorithms, are utilized to solve the ASP problem. To solve ASP , an exact algorithm generally uses the graph model to express all of the solution spaces of the assembly sequence and subsequently ﬁnds the optimal assembly sequence on the basis of graph search algorithms [6]. Homem de Mello and Sanderson [7] used the cut-set algorithm to solve the ASP problem. First, an assembly diagram was obtained based on the assembly information. Second, the assembly sequence was generated using the cut-set method, and lastly, the optimal assembly sequence was determined through evaluation. In addition, assembly sequences can be expressed by AND/OR diagrams [8], Petri nets [9], and other models. Although these exact methods guarantee the obtainment of the optimal assembly sequence, combination explosion is prone to occur as the number of parts increases [10]. In recent years, heuristic algorithms have demonstrated advantages in solving the ASP problem [11]. Heuristic algorithms are guided by certain rules as they search for the possible optimal solution in the search space [12]. Among these algorithms, the intelligent algorithm mimicking natural biological evolution and the social behavior of species achieves the best result. It uses random numbers to overcome the local Received July 7, 2020; accepted September 25, 2020 Zunpu HAN, Yong W ANG (✉), De TIAN Renewable Energy School, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China E-mail: wangyyong100@163.com Y ong W ANG College of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Tarim University, Alar 843300, China Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11465-020-0613-3 optima defect [13]. Research on this area used the genetic algorithm (GA) [14,15], ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm [16 –18], particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm [19 –21], and other intelligent algorithms [22 – 24]. Different from exact algorithms, heuristic algorithms ﬁnd a satisfactory or near-optimal solution in an acceptable computation time in most cases. Each heuristic algorithm has its own special characteristics and is suitable for solving particular problems or instances. For example, ACO is useful for solving discrete optimization problems, and PSO is suitable for solving continuous optimization problems. Therefore, many scholars have attempted to combine these algorithms to improve performance. Ab Rashid [25] proposed a hybrid algorithm using ACO and the gray wolf optimizer [26] to address the ASP problem. A global pheromone-updating procedure that utilizes the leadership hierarchy concept from gray wolf optimizer for ACO was used to overcome premature convergence. Shuang et al. [27] proposed a PSO-ACO hybrid algorithm in which the local and global searches of PSO are incorporated to balance the exploration and maintenance performance of the algorithm. Two steps are implemented when an intelligent algo- rithm is used to solve the ASP problem. First, a ﬁtness function is constructed to calculate the cost of an assembly sequence. Second, the algorithm continuously searches for a sequence with a high ﬁtness value until the algorithm converges. Given the existence of numerous interference relationships between parts in an assembly, an interference check must be performed to remove infeasible sequences after a complete sequence is found [20]. As the number of parts increases, the number of infeasible sequences increases sharply, and the convergence rate of the algorithm decreases. In addition, most of the generated sequences do not meet actual assembly requirements due to the violation of process constraints [28]. Therefore, assembly constraints and rules should be considered when establishing an assembly model, and the feasibility and rationality of the assembly sequence can be guaranteed when an intelligent algorithm is used to solve ASP . As an intelligent optimization algorithm, ACO has strong robustness, distributed computing, memory proper- ties, positive feedback, and self-organization. It is easy to combine with other algorithms and suitable for solving various combinatorial optimization problems. Deng et al. [29] proposed an effective improved co-evolution ACO (MSICEAO) algorithm and applied it to the traveling salesman problem (TSP) and the actual gate allocation problem. Their experimental results showed that MSICEAO has superior performance. Luan et al. [30] applied the ACO algorithm to the personalized trip recommendation problem. Trip relevance and trip diversity were considered in trip planning, and a maximal marginal- relevance-based personalized trip recommendation model was proposed. Moreover, ACO has been used to plan trips efﬁciently. Boukens et al. [31] proposed an intelligent controller for motion control of robotic systems on the basis of fuzzy ACO. Fuzzy if –then rules were used to integrate expert knowledge into the behavior of arti ﬁcial ants, thereby improving the exploration capacity and solution accuracy of the ACO algorithm. When the ACO algorithm is adopted to solve optimization problems, the parameter settings exert a great impact on algorithm performance due to the complex coupling relationship between parameters. The algorithm parameter settings for obtaining improved solutions differ for various problems or cases. At present, no complete theoretical basis is available for ACO parameter assignment. Parameter values are often obtained based on experience or through many experiments [32]. Thus, the assignment of ACO para- meters usually increases the complexity of using the ACO algorithm to solve ASP . Several scholars have conducted research on optimal parameter settings. Wang and Kumbasar [33] used big bang big crunch (BBBC) optimization and PSO to optimize the parameters of interval type-2 fuzzy neural networks, thereby reducing the dif ﬁculty of parameter design. Their experiment showed that BBBC has superior parameter optimization capability for interval type-2 fuzzy neural networks compared with PSO. Gao et al. [34] adopted the Taguchi experimental design method to determine the reasonable combination of dendritic neuron model parameters. Experiments showed that the Taguchi method can identify a good parameter combination in few experiments, thus reducing the experiment time. Focusing on the problem of ACO algorithm parameter optimization, several scholars have tried to use other heuristic algorithms to optimize ACO parameters and thus reduce hard labor and improve performance. Botee and Bonabeau [35] utilized GA to optimize ACO parameters. The parameters of the ACO algorithm were encoded into binary chromo- some, and the optimal parameter combination was obtained afterward through genetic operators. Mahi et al. [36] proposed a hybrid method to optimize the parameters that affect the performance of the ACO algorithm by using PSO. The PSO algorithm was utilized to detect the optimum values of parameters α and β in the ACO algorithm. Ariyaratne et al. [37] used the ﬁreﬂy algorithm to tune ACO parameters for TSP . In these studies on ACO algorithm parameter optimization, the evaluation index of the ACO algorithm parameters could be improved, but the parameter combination obtained from the experiments could not fully ensure that ACO would ﬁnd satisfactory solutions. The algorithms used to optimize ACO para- meters, such as PSO and GA, also require parameter assignment. Different parameter assignments affect the performance of hybrid algorithms. In addition, due to the randomness of the ACO algorithm, the resulting parameter combination cannot easily guarantee the stability of the algorithm. Hybrid algorithms generally ﬁnd different 394 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 solutions for the same problem or instance in different experiments. The symbiotic organisms search (SOS) algorithm was proposed by Cheng and Prayogo [38]. Compared with other intelligent optimization algorithms, it does not need parameters. That is, speci ﬁc parameters do not have to be set for the SOS algorithm. The performance of SOS is therefore unaffected by parameter settings. Furthermore, the three phases of the SOS algorithm are easy to implement. SOS has been widely used to solve various continuous and combinatorial optimization problems [39,40]. The solution of the SOS algorithm is unaffected by parameter settings. Using SOS to optimize ACO algorithm parameters can reduce the complexity of ACO parameter settings. In view of the characteristics of SOS, a hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm that combines SOS and ACO is proposed in the current study to solve the ASP problem. First, an assembly model t hat incorpora tes multiple assembly constraints and rules is established. The assembly sequences that meet geometry constraints and practical assembly requirements are determined. Second, a hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm is designed. A ﬁtness function for evaluating ACO parameter combinations is established, and SOS is used to optimize four key parameters of the ACO algorithm. The amount of effort devoted to assigning ACO parameters is greatly reduced. On the basis of the optimized parameters, the ACO algorithm detects the optimal and near-optimal assembly sequences. Computa- tional experiments reveal the good performance of the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm. Compared with the ACO algorithm, the SOS-ACO algorithm ﬁnds a better assembly sequence, and the convergence speed is increased under the same conditions. Given an ASP instance, the SOS- ACO algorithm demonstrates strong stability in ﬁnding the best assembly sequence in almost all experiments. The main contributions and innovations of the research are summarized as follows: 1) A new hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm is proposed for ASP . Compared with the basic ACO algorithm, SOS-ACO achieves better solutions and convergence rate and has stronger robustness, as revealed by the experimental results. 2) SOS is utilized to optimize the ACO parameters. The ACO algorithm uses the optimized parameters to calculate the optimal assembly sequence, thus avoiding the heavy workload and complexity of parameter assignment. The efﬁciency of ASP is also improved. 3) The performance of SOS-ACO when several given parameters are changed is analyzed through experiments. The results illustrate that SOS-ACO has good adaptive capability to parameter changes and can still achieve competitive solutions. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the assembly model that incorporates multiple assembly constraints and rules. Section 3 describes the basic principles of ACO as it searches for optimal or near- optimal assembly sequences under assembly constraints. Section 4 introduces the proposed SOS-ACO algorithm for solving ASP . In Section 5, a wind turbine gearbox is used to demonstrate the application of the SOS-ACO algorithm, and the performance of SOS-ACO under given parameter values is analyzed through experiments. The last section presents the conclusions and possible future research directions. 2 Assembly model for ASP The assembly model entails multiple assembly constraints and rules. It is used to derive an assembly sequence that meets assembly requirements. The assembly constraints and rules greatly reduce the search space of the optimal assembly sequence. The objective function is adopted to evaluate the quality of a feasible assembly sequence. The assembly sequence with the minimum cost is considered the optimal assembly sequence. 2.1 Assembly constraints Building an assembly model is the premise for solving the ASP problem. The assembly model contains the compre- hensive assembly information necessary for deriving a feasible assembly sequence. The model is helpful in ﬁnding the best assembly sequence [41]. For convenience, the assembly information for ASP is presented as matrices for computer calculation and processing. The interference, connection, and assembly priority matrices are used to express the assembly relationships between parts. 1) Interference matrix The interference matrix expresses the assembly inter- ference between parts in the assembly process. It is used to judge the assembly feasibility and assembly direction of every part. If an assembly, AS, consists of n parts, then AS ={ P1, P2, ..., Pn}, where Pi is the ith part or component. In the assembly coordinate system denoted by three ortho- gonal coordinate axes ( X, Y,a n d Z), the assembly directions of each part are restricted to six directions, namely, /C6 X , /C6 Y , and /C6 Z. The assembly interference between parts can be expressed by interference matrix DM, which is indicated in Eq. (1). DM ¼ I11xI11yI11z I12xI12yI12z ⋯ I1nxI1nyI1nz I21xI21yI21z I22xI22yI22z ⋯ I2nxI2nyI2nz MM M In1xIn1yIn1z In2xIn2yIn2z ⋯ InnxInnyInnz 2 66664 3 77775 : (1) The value of an element is de ﬁned as Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 395 Iijx ¼ 1, part Pi interferes with Pj in the þX direction as Pi is assembled along the þX direction; 0, otherwise :    8 >>>>< >>>>: (2) In the 3D CAD system, the values of Iijy and Iijz can be obtained using the same method. 2) Connection matrix The assembly relationship indicates a certain link or connection between components [42]. The connection matrix expresses the contact and connection relationships between parts in an assembly. It is used to judge stability after the assembly relationship is realized. The connection between parts is expressed by matrix SC, that is, SC = [Cij]n/C2 n. The value of an element Cij represents the connection types between parts Pi and Pj. The value of Cij is deﬁned as Cij ¼ 0, there is no contact relationship between parts Pi and Pj; 1, there is only a contact relationship between the parts Pi and Pj; 2, the part Pi is  supported by Pj in the direction of gravity; 3, there is a stable connection between Pi and Pj: 8 >>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>< >>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>: (3) 3) Assembly priority matrix The many assembly priority relationships that exist between mating parts in an assembly should be considered for ASP . For example, for a threaded connection, the nut should ﬁt on the bolt rather than the opposite way. For such constraints, an assembly priority matrix is built in advance based on assembly knowledge and experience to express the assembly priority between mating parts. Assembly priority constraints are useful in searching for reasonable assembly sequences. The solution space is further reduced as numerous priorities are added, and the convergence rate of algorithms is increased. The value of an element in assembly priority matrix AP =[ Aij]n/C2 n which is anti-symmetric is de ﬁned as Aij ¼ 0, there is no assembly priority relationship between parts Pi and Pj; 1, part Pi is assembled before Pj; –1, part Pi is assembled after Pj: 8 >>>>< >>>>: (4) 2.2 Assembly rules The purpose of ASP is to ﬁnd the best assembly sequence that is feasible and reasonable [28]. When the ACO algorithm is used to search for an optimal or near-optimal sequence, the candidate part set must be given at each step. The candidate parts should meet the assembly constraints, which ensure the feasibility and rationality of the generated sequence while ﬁltering out the other parts. In this manner, the search space of the ACO algorithm is reduced. The assembly rules for computing the candidate part set are given as follows. 1) Non-duplication rule The candidate part set must not contain the assembled parts. Otherwise, the assembly sequence will not meet practical assembly requirements. 2) Contact rule The parts to be assembled must have at least one contact or connection relationship with one of the assembled parts. This rule avoids the “ﬂoating” state of parts during the assembly process. If a “ﬂoating” part occurs, additional supports or ﬁxtures are required in the assembly process, and this will increase the assembly cost. Either the contact or connection relationships between parts are judged according to the elements in connection matrix SC. 3) Interference rule After a part is assembled, it cannot interfere with the subsequent parts to be assembled. The interference rule ensures that the generated sequences meet geometry constraints. The assembly interference between parts is judged based on the elements in interference matrix DM. 4) Assembly priority rule The assembly priority rule ensures that highly realistic assembly sequences are computed. In accordance with assembly priority matrix AP, the computer can determine whether a part P is assembled before or after another part Q. Our program uses four steps to generate a candidate part set that conforms to the four rules. Step 1: Collect the candidate part set S1 that does not contain the assembled parts. Step 2: Given S1, ﬁnd the part set S2 where each part has at least one contact or connection relationship with one of the assembled parts. Step 3: Delete the parts that will interfere with the subsequent assembly parts from S2 to obtain the part set S3. Step 4: Delete the parts that violate the assembly priority relationship from S3 to obtain the part set S. The part set S is the candidate part set that meets the assembly constraints. At each step, the ACO algorithm ﬁnds a suitable part from S for constructing an assembly sequence. 2.3 Objective function Under the assembly constraints, algorithms search for 396 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 sequences with a low assembly cost and high assembly efﬁciency. The factors that affect the assembly cost and assembly ef ﬁciency are incorporated into the objective function to evaluate an assembly sequence. The objective function is constructed by considering three indicators, namely, assembly reorientations, assembly continuity, and assembly stability. 1) Assembly reorientation A small number of assembly reorientations is helpful in reducing the assembly cost and improving assembly efﬁciency. Given an assembly sequence AS ={ P1, P2, ..., Pn}, the assembly direction of any part Pi is AD(Pi), AD(Pi)/C26 {/C6 X, /C6 Y, /C6 Z}. The enumeration of the reor- ientations is given as below [43]: Step 1: Let i =1 , q = 1, and Nor =0 . Nor represents the number of reorientations of the sequence AS. Step 2: If AD(Pi)\ AD(Pi+1)\$$$\ AD(Pi+ q)≠Æ and AD(Pi)\ AD(Pi+1)\$$$\ AD(Pi+ q+1)=Æ, then part Pi+q+1 needs to be reoriented once. When Nor = Nor + 1, go to step 3. When q = q + 1, continue to step 2. Meanwhile, if I + q + 1= n, go to step 4. Step 3: i = i + q + 1, and q =1 .I f i < n, go to step 2. Otherwise, go to step 4. Step 4: Output the number of reorientations Nor of the assembly sequence AS. 2) Assembly continuity An assembly process generally requires different types of assembly operations, such as stamping, screwing, and riveting [20]. Different tools are required as the assembly operation changes. Meanwhile, the assembly cost and time increase. Assembly continuity pertains to the similarity between two adjacent assembly operations where the same tools are used. The number of tool changes is used to measure assembly continuity. In accordance with the given assembly tools, the number of tool changes can be calculated for any assembly sequence. 3) Assembly stability Assembly stability is the capability of one assembled part to maintain its assembly relationship with the other parts under gravity after it is assembled. Assembly stability is important for measuring an assembly sequence. If an assembled part is unstable, additional ﬁxtures or auxiliary equipment will be used, and this will increase the assembly cost and assembly complexity. For large and heavy parts, assembly stability may affect the safety of the assembly process [44]. If an assembled part meets one of the following conditions, then the corresponding assembly process is stable. Otherwise, the part is unstable, and additional ﬁxtures are required to support the part [41]. Condition 1: The assembled parts support the part to be assembled in the direction of gravity. Condition 2: The part to be assembled has a stable connection with at least one of the assembled parts. During assembly, the number of unstable parts is used to quantify the stability of an assembly sequence. Suppose that AS ={ P1, P2, ..., Pi–1} is the assembled part set, and Pi is the part to be assembled. According to connection matrix SC, if an element Cij= 2 or 3 exists in the ith row, then Pi is supported or has a stable connection with the assembled parts. Pi will be stable after it is assembled. Otherwise, the assembly process is unstable. This method is used to quantify the stability of an assembly sequence. Given that assembly reorientations, assembly continuity, and assem- bly stability are considered, the evaluation of the assembly sequence is a problem in multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM). Feng et al. [45] proposed a disassembly multi- objective optimization model for target disassembly sequencing and used an improved multi-objective ACO algorithm to solve the model. The analytic network process was employed to analyze the signi ﬁcance of indices and allocate relevant weights, thereby guiding decision makers in determining a suitable target disassembly sequence. Hong et al. [46] proposed an integrated approach that combines the improved great deluge algorithm, evidence reasoning, interval algorithm, and fuzzy grey correlation analysis for multi-objective optimization and MCDM of energy internet in consideration of uncertainty. The proposed method can simultaneously solve the multi- objective optimization and MCDM of energy internet. Feng et al. [47] established a product recovery plan model b a s e do nh y b r i dd i s a s s e m b l y .R e c o v e r yp r oﬁta n d environmental impact were adopted as optimization objectives. Multi-objective genetic algorithms were used to solve the model and obtain the Pareto-optimal solution. In this study, for the convenience of practical application, the three indicators are assigned different weights and added afterward to obtain the objective function. The assembly sequence is evaluated in accordance with the objective function. On the basis of the three indicators, the objective function of an assembly sequence is constructed as CðASÞ¼ W1 /C2 Nor þ W2 /C2 Nt þ W3 /C2 Nw, (5) where AS represents an assembly sequence, C(AS) is the objective function of AS, Nor, Nt, and Nw represent the number of reorientations, assembly continuity, and stabi- lity of the assembly sequence, respectively, and W1, W2, and W3 are the weights of the three indicators. The weight of each indicator is assigned by the engineer in accordance with real-life situations. For example, stability and reorientations exert a considerable effect on the assembly process for large and heavy parts. Thus, the corresponding weights can be increased. 3 Search for an assembly sequence with ACO For a given ASP instance, the assembly model is established ﬁrst. Then, the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm is used to ﬁnd the optimal or near-optimal assembly sequence Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 397 under the assembly constrai nts. In the optimization process, the SOS algorithm is used to optimize the parameters of the ACO algorithm, and the assembly sequence is detected by the ACO algorithm. The detection of an assembly sequence with the ACO algorithm is described as follows. 3.1 State transition probability In ACO, state transition probability is the probability that an ant goes from the current part Pi to the next part Pj to construct an assembly sequence. It depends on the pheromone concentration and heuristic information between Pi and Pj. The calculation of state transition probability ( Pk ijðtÞ) is shown in Eq. (6) [48]. Pk ijðtÞ¼ ½τijðtÞ/C138 α½ηij/C138 β X u 2 allowedk ½τiuðtÞ/C138 α½ηiu/C138 β , j 2 allowedk , 0, otherwise, 8 >>< >>: (6) where τijðtÞ represents the pheromone concentration between parts Pi and Pj at a certain iteration, ηij represents the heuristic information between parts Pi and Pj, α and β represent the importance factors of the pheromone and heuristic information, respectively, and allowedk repre- sents the candidate part set. 3.2 Heuristic function at the part level An ant passes from one part to another according to the heuristic information in Eq. (6). As can be seen, the assembled parts affect the assembly cost of the following parts. Thus, the heuristic information is dynamic during the search process of an assembly. Considering the objective function Eq. (5), the heuristic function at the part level is built as ηij ¼ 1 norþntþnw , (7) where nor, nt, and nw represent heuristic information about assembly reorientation, assembly continuity, and assembly stability, respectively. The values of nor, nt, and nw are deﬁned as follows: nor ¼ 0:2, parts Pi and Pj are assembled in the same direction; 1, otherwise : 8 >< >: (8) nt ¼ 0:2, parts Pi and Pj are assembled with the same assembly tool; 1, otherwise : 8 >< >: (9) nw ¼ 0:2, the assembly process between parts Pi and Pj is stable; 1, otherwise : 8 >< >: (10) 3.3 Pheromone update rule After an ant goes from Pi to Pj, the pheromone between the two parts is updated. In addition to increasing the pheromone on the path between Pi and Pj, a part of the pheromone on the path is evaporated to reduce the attractiveness of the pheromone for the following ants. This strategy increases the probability that ant colony transfer to various parts and the diversity of the solution will be improved. Dynamic adjustment of the pheromone can prevent the algorithm from falling into a local optimum. The local pheromone update rule is shown as τijðtÞ¼ð 1 – /C26Þ/C2 τijðtÞþ /C26 /C2 τ0, (11) where /C26 is the local pheromone evaporation coef ﬁcient, and τ0 is the initial pheromone concentration. Evidently, the larger /C26 is, the more extensively the pheromones will evaporate and the less attractive the path between Pi and Pj becomes to the subsequent ants. When all ants complete one cycle, each ant ﬁnds one assembly sequence. The pheromones on the paths are updated at this time. Each ant strengthens the pheromone on the path it passes according to the quality of the searched assembly sequence. Meanwhile, a part of pheromones on all paths is evaporated. Several global pheromone update rules are available. Here, the global pheromone is updated only for the path traveled by the ants that ﬁnd the best assembly sequences. This strategy aims to enhance the positive feedback of pheromones [16]. The global pheromone update rules are shown as τijðt þ 1Þ¼ð 1 – γÞτijðtÞþ Xm k¼1 Δτk ijðtÞ, (12) Δτk ijðtÞ¼ Q C, the kth ant passes the path between Pi and Pj, 0, otherwise, 8 >>< >>: (13) where γ is the global pheromone evaporation coef ﬁcient, Δτk ijðtÞ is the increased pheromone on the path between parts Pi and Pj, m is the number of ants that ﬁnd the best assembly sequences in this cycle, C is the objective function value of the assembly sequence, and Q is a pheromone enhancement coef ﬁcient that is used to adjust the amount of pheromone enhancement. 398 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 4 Hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm When the ACO algorithm is used to resolve an ASP problem, obtaining a suitable set of parameter values usually takes a long time. To reduce the labor needed in assigning ACO parameters, the hybrid SOS-ACO algo- rithm is designed for ASP , where the SOS algorithm is used to optimize the key ACO parameters. The procedure is mainly divided into two steps. In the ﬁrst step, a set of ACO parameters is obtained by the SOS algorithm. In the second step, the ACO algorithm is executed to resolve ASP using the generated parameters. The two steps are iterated until the optimal parameter combination and the optimal assembly sequence are achieved. 4.1 Assignment of ACO parameters The ACO algorithm has six main parameters, which are number of ants m, pheromone importance factor α, heuristic information importance factor β, global phero- mone enhancement coef ﬁcient Q, local pheromone evaporation coefﬁcient /C26, and global pheromone evapora- tion coef ﬁcient γ. Through simulations and experiments, previous studies [32,49,50] have shown that parameter values affect the performance of ACO. The main results are summarized below: 1) As the number of ants increases, the global search capability of ACO also increases. However, this condition reduces the positive feedback of the pheromone and leads to a low convergence rate. If few ants are used, the algorithm is likely to be trapped into local minima. 2) When the pheromone importance factor α is too large, the ants prefer the path with a high pheromone concentra- tion, causing the algorithm to fall into local minima. When α is too small, the cooperation of the ants decreases, and the convergence of the algorithm becomes slow. 3) A large value of heuristic information importance factor β strengthens the effect of the heuristic information on the ants. The local shortest paths are selected by most ants. Then, ACO becomes a greedy algorithm, and it falls into the local minima. If β is too small, the convergence rate will be low. 4) The local and global pheromone evaporation coefﬁcients, /C26 and γ, directly affect the global search capability and convergence rate of the ACO algorithm. If the two values are too large, then the pheromone will evaporate too quickly. The positive feedback of the ant colony will weaken, and the convergence rate of the algorithm will be reduced. If /C26 and γ are too small, then too much pheromone residue will be present on the path. The ants will have a high probability of repeating the previous paths, and the global search capability will be reduced. 5) If a large global pheromone enhancement coef ﬁcient Q is used, then the accumulation of pheromones on the paths will be fast. Meanwhile, the positive feedback of the ant colony is strengthened. If Q is small, pheromone accumulation will weaken, thereby decreasing the con- vergence rate. The above-mentioned research shows that the para- meters of the ACO algorithm are not independent of one another but have complex coupling relationships instead. For example, the value of Q depends on the assignments of α, β, /C26, and γ. The number of ants m is also affected by other parameter values. The experiments illustrated that ACO performance relies on a suitable assignment of parameters. However, numerous experiments are often required to obtain a reasonable set of parameter values. In addition, a set of parameter values for one problem or instance is unreasonable for other cases. The SOS algorithm is used in ACO parameter optimization to reduce the dif ﬁculty of parameter setting and improve the performance of ACO in ASP . According to previous research, the four parameters (α, β, /C26, and γ) help ACO ﬁnd a satisfactory solution. Thus, they are selected for optimization. The two other parameters, m and Q, can be assigned by engineers. In the experiments, the SOS algorithm always ﬁnds a set of suitable values for α, β, /C26, and γ whatever the assigned values of m and Q values are. When the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm is utilized, the complex couplings among the ACO parameters are disregarded, and ASP can be implemented conveniently. 4.2 SOS algorithm The SOS algorithm was introduced recently. Three phases, namely, mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism, are used to simulate the mutual symbiotic relationship among organisms in nature. SOS has been successfully applied to solve various continuous and discrete optimization pro- blems. Different from many other intelligent algorithms, the SOS algorithm does not entail any speci ﬁc parameters. SOS is used to optimize the parameters of the ACO algorithm because it is easy to implement and avoids the secondary setting of parameters. During optimization, the SOS algorithm randomly generates a group of organisms as the initial population. Each organism represents a solution of the problem and has a corresponding ﬁtness value that represents the adaptation in the ecosystem. The previous organisms evolve to the next organisms through mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism. During the evolution, only the organisms with a high ﬁtness value are maintained. The evolution process is repeated until the termination condition is met. At this time, the organism with the highest ﬁtness is outputted. 1) Mutualism phase The mutualism phase simulates the general mutualism that exists among ecosystems, such as the relationship between rhinos and rhino birds, bees, and ﬂowers. Given an organism Xi, another different organism Xj≠ Xi is selected from the population. A mutualism operation is performed for Xi and Xj to enhance their survival capability in the ecosystem. On the basis of the mutualism operation, Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 399 two new candidates Xinew and Xjnew are generated with Xinew ¼ Xi þ randð0, 1 Þ/C2ð Xbest – Mutual_Vector /C2 BF1Þ, (14) Xjnew ¼ Xj þ randð0, 1 Þ/C2ð Xbest – Mutual_Vector /C2 BF2Þ, (15) Mutual_Vector ¼ Xi þ Xj 2 , (16) where rand(0, 1) is a random number in (0, 1), Xbest represents the organism with the highest ﬁtness value at the current cycle, BF1 and BF2 2f 1, 2 g are the mutualism beneﬁt factors between Xi and Xj, and Mutual_V ectoris the common beneﬁt determined by Xi and Xj. BF1 and BF2 are determined as either 1 or 2 at random. Xinew and Xjnew are accepted only if the ﬁtness values are higher than those of Xi and Xj, respectively. In the mutualism phase, the new solutions are obtained through the current optimal solution and the average of two organisms ( Mutual_V ector). Given that both organisms are far from each other in the search space, new organisms are explored from the regions between the two organisms. Thus, the global optimization capability is enhanced. 2) Commensalism phase Different from the situation in the mutualism phase, only one of the two organisms bene ﬁt in the commensalism phase; the other is unchanged. Given an organism Xi, another organism Xj is selected at random from the population. Xi is converted to a new organism with the help of Xj. The new organism is computed as Xinew ¼ Xi þ randð –1, 1 Þ/C2ð Xbest – XjÞ, (17) where randð –1, 1 Þ is a random number in ( – 1, 1), and Xbest is the current best solution. Xinew will be accepted only if the ﬁtness value is higher than that of Xi. In the commensalism phase, the current best solution is adopted as the reference organism for updating Xi. This phase aims to exploit a promising organism near the best solution. The convergence rate of the algorithm is improved by this phase. 3) Parasitism phase This phase bene ﬁts one organism and harms the other. First, an organism Xi is selected and copied as an arti ﬁcial parasite called “Parasite_V ector .” Second, Parasite_V ector is modiﬁed in a certain dimension computed with a random number. Lastly, an organism Xj is selected as a host for comparison. If the ﬁtness value of Parasite_V ectoris better than that of Xj, Parasite_V ectorwill replace Xj. Otherwise, Xj will be retained, and Parasite_V ector will be dis- regarded. 4.3 Fitness function of the parameter combination The goal of ASP is to obtain the assembly sequence with the minimum assembly cost among all feasible sequences. Therefore, the cost of the assembly sequence should be considered in the optimization of ACO parameters. If only the assembly cost is adopted as the index for computing ACO parameters, then guaranteeing the stability of the ACO algorithm in ASP will be dif ﬁcult. For example, only a few ants may search for the optimal solution, and most of the other ants do not do so based on such parameter values. If ACO is implemented again using this parameter combination, then the probability that ACO cannot ﬁnd the optimal solution will be high. Therefore, ACO parameters calculated based solely on the assembly cost are unsatisfactory. The parameter ﬁtness function is constructed in accordance with three aspects, which are algorithm optimization capability, stability, and conver- gence. The ﬁtness function of the parameter combination is shown as f ðsÞ¼ w1 /C2 LðsÞþ w2 /C2 GðsÞþ w3 /C2 RðsÞ,   LsðÞ ¼ 1 Llocal – Lbest þ 1 ,  GsðÞ ¼ mg m ,    RsðÞ ¼ 1 – NC NCmax , (18) where f ðsÞ is the ﬁtness function of parameter combination s, and w1, w2, and w3 are the weights that express the importance of indexes L(s), G(s), and R(s), respectively, w1 + w2 + w3 =1 . L(s) represents the optimization capability of ACO with parameter combination s, Llocal is the current optimal solution found by the ACO algorithm with parameter combination s, and Lbest is the known optimal solution or the theoretical optimal solution. GðsÞ represents the stability of the ACO algorithm, where mg is the number of ants that ﬁnd the optimal solution and m is the number of ants in the ant colony. The larger mg is, the more stable the ACO algorithm is. RðsÞ represents the convergence rate of the algorithm, where NC is the minimum iteration for ﬁnding the optimal solution and NCmax is the total/maximum iteration of the ACO algorithm. 4.4 Procedure of the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm The ﬂowchart of the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm is shown in Fig. 1. The parameter combinations of the ACO algorithm are adopted as organisms in the SOS algorithm. Given that the four parameters (i.e., α, β, /C26, and γ) are to be optimized, an organism is represented as the parameter combination ( α, β, /C26, and γ). Each organism is updated through the mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism phases. Whenever the SOS algorithm calculates a set of 400 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 ACO parameter values, the ACO algorithm using the set of parameter values is called once to search for an optimal assembly sequence. Then, the parameter combination is evaluated based on the results of the ACO algorithm. The parameter combination with a high ﬁtness value is retained. The above-mentioned computations are repeated until the termination condition is met. When the algorithm stops, it outputs the optimal parameter combination with the highest ﬁtness value and the optimal assembly sequence computed by using this parameter combination. The main steps of the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm for ASP are as follows: Step 1: The ﬁrst step is initialization. The maximum iteration ( iter_max) and the number of organisms ( N) for the SOS algorithm are given. The number of ants m and pheromone enhancement coef ﬁcient Q for the ACO algorithm are also assigned. The population of the SOS algorithm is randomly generated. The current optimal organism Xbest is computed based on the ﬁtness value of organisms. Step 2: The organisms are updated through the mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism phases. In the three phases, the organisms with a high ﬁtness value evolve to the next generation. Step 3: The organism Xbest with the highest ﬁtness value is adopted as the parameter of ACO for computing the optimal assembly sequence. Step 4: When the algorithm reaches the termination condition, the optimal organism Xbest and the optimal assembly sequence are outputted. Otherwise, step 2 is repeated for the next iteration. 5 Experiments and analysis The performance of the SOS-ACO algorithm is veri ﬁed with an ASP instance. The best assembly sequence of a wind turbine gearbox is identi ﬁed using SOS-ACO. The wind turbine gearbox contains 21 functional parts. The explosion model of the gearbox assembly is shown in Fig. 2, where each component is given a number. The numbers and names of the parts are presented in Table 1. 5.1 Evolution of the SOS-ACO algorithm The control parameters in the experiment are given as follows. The population size N of the SOS algorithm is 10, and the maximum iteration iter_max is 100. The maximum iteration NC_max of the ACO algorithm is 100, the number of ants m is 20, and global pheromone enhance- ment coefﬁcient Q is 10. The weights of the indicators in Eq. (5) are set to W1 =2 , W2 = 1.5, and W3 = 2.5. Given that the box (part 9) is the heaviest part, it is adopted as the base part ( ﬁrst part to be assembled). Fig. 1 Flowchart of the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm. Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 401 The hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm is run ﬁve times to show its performance. Five sets of optimal parameter combinations and the corresponding optimal assembly sequences are obtained. For comparison, ﬁve sets of parameter combinations are randomly generated according to the value range of each parameter in Table 2. The parameter value ranges in Table 2 are determined based on the guidelines provided in Refs. [51 –53]. The optimal and random parameter combinations are presented in Table 3. We show the changes in the ﬁtness values of the ﬁve parameter combinations in 100 cycles. The evolution processes of the optimal and average ﬁtness values of the parameter combinations are shown in Fig. 3. In the iterations of the SOS algorithm, the optimal and average ﬁtness value changes of the ACO parameter combinations exhibit the same trend. They tend to approach the optimal parameter combination with the highest ﬁtness value. In view of the optimal ﬁtness value, the SOS algorithm Fig. 2 Explosion model of a wind turbine gearbox. Table 1 Information on the parts of a wind turbine gearbox No. Part name Number of part Connection type Assembly tool 1 Input shaft 1 Key joint T3 2 Left-end cover 1 Threaded connection T2 3 Left-end bearing chock 1 Threaded connection T1 4 First-stage inner gear ring 1 Threaded connection T4 5 First-stage planet gear 3 Interference ﬁtT 5 6 First-stage planet gear axle 3 Pin connection T3 7 First-stage planet carrier 1 Key joint T4 8 First-stage solar gear 1 Splined connection T5 9 Box 1 Threaded connection T1 10 Second-stage inner gear ring 1 Threaded connection T4 11 Second-stage planet carrier 1 Splined connection T4 12 Second-stage planet gear 3 Interference ﬁtT 5 13 Second-stage planet gear axle 3 Pin connection T3 14 Second-stage solar gear 1 Splined connection T5 15 Spline shaft 1 Splined connection T3 16 Output straight gear 1 Key joint T5 17 Third-stage straight gear 1 Key joint T5 18 Output shaft 1 Key joint T3 19 Output box 1 Threaded connection T1 20 Output bearing end cover 1 Threaded connection T2 21 Bearing end cover 1 Threaded connection T2 402 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 converges to the optimal solution. This condition shows that the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm ﬁnally converges to the optimal assembly sequence. For comparison, the optimal and random parameter combinations in Table 3 are used to run the ACO algorithm for computing the assembly sequences. The evolutions of assembly costs based on the optimal and random parameter combinations in Table 3 are shown in Fig. 4. Figure 4 indicates that an assembly sequence with the same minimum cost is obtained using the ﬁve optimal parameter combinations. However, the assembly sequences searched based on the random parameter combinations generally have poor quality. Moreover, the optimal solutions generated based on the ﬁve random parameter combina- tions are not unique. In comparison, the ACO algorithm searches for better assembly sequences on the basis of the optimal parameter combination rather than the random parameter combination, which means that the global optimization capability of the ACO algorithm is improved by the SOS algorithm. For random parameter combination IV , the ACO algorithm falls into the local minima with poor quality at an early iteration. The solution does not change during the subsequent iterations. This result shows that the global optimization capability of the ACO algorithm is dif ﬁcult to improve on the basis of several random parameter combinations. In previous studies, researchers obtained a set of reasonable ACO parameters through numerous experi- ments and simulations. Large amounts of time and labor were devoted to ﬁnding useful ACO parameter values. In the current study, the best assembly sequences identi ﬁed by the ACO algorithm on the basis of the random parameter combinations differ. This ﬁnding indicates that the ACO algorithm is not robust for the ASP problem. When the optimal parameter combinations are utilized, the ACO algorithm always ﬁnds the optimal assembly sequence with the same minimum assembly cost. The optimal parameter combination identi ﬁed by SOS enhances the robustness of the ACO algorithm. Moreover, the minimum number of iterations used to ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence is less than 40, and it is less than 20 in three experiments using the optimal parameter combina- tions. However, the ACO algorithm requires more than 50 iterations to ﬁnd the best assembly sequence by using four groups of random parameter combinations. This result shows that the SOS algorithm considerably improves the convergence rate of the ACO algorithm. To verify the robustness and stability of the hybrid SOS- ACO algorithm, the ACO algorithm is executed 10 times with each parameter combination in Table 3. The experimental results are shown in Table 4. The minimum cost is obtained from the 10 experiments. The number of times needed to ﬁnd the minimum cost is recorded and shown in Table 4. The ACO algorithm fails to ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence in several experiments. The average minimum cost is given for evaluation. In each experiment, several ants ﬁnd the assembly sequence with the minimum cost. The average number of such ants is also computed based on the 10 experiments. In addition, one or several ants always ﬁnd the assembly sequence with the minimum cost ﬁrst. The average minimum number of iterations to obtain the minimum cost is computed with respect to the 10 experiments. It is used to illustrate the convergence rate of the ACO algorithm. By using any one set of the optimal parameter combinations, the ACO algorithm is able to identify the assembly sequence with the minimum cost in most of the experiments. When a set of random parameter combina- tions is used, the ACO algorithm does not ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence in nearly all the experiments. In most Table 2 V alue range of each parameter Parameter Range α [1, 5] β [1, 5] /C26 [0.1, 1] γ [0.1, 1] Table 3 Optimal and random parameter combinations Parameter combination Combination αβ /C26 γ Optimal parameter combinations 1 2.79 1.25 0.10 0.21 2 2.71 1.56 0.14 0.37 3 4.20 2.32 0.19 0.39 4 3.41 2.18 0.23 0.28 5 2.29 1.63 0.12 0.34 Random parameter combinations I 1.00 2.00 0.50 0.40 II 2.00 3.00 0.30 0.70 III 3.00 1.00 0.50 0.60 IV 4.00 1.00 0.10 0.20 V 3.00 5.00 0.60 0.20 Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 403 cases, ACO computes a near-optimal solution for ASP . This result shows that the ACO algorithm using the optimal parameter combination has strong robustness and stability. Given that the optimal parameters are obtained by the SOS algorithm, the SOS algorithm considerably improves the robustness and stability of the ACO algorithm for ASP . Comparison of the minimum cost and average minimum cost of the 10 experiments indicates that the ACO using the optimal parameter combination is more reliable than the ACO based on the random parameter combination. It also shows that the SOS-ACO algorithm is more reliable than the ACO algorithm for ASP . The last two columns of Table 4 show that most ants in the ACO algorithm ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence in each experiment, and a few iterations are used to ﬁnd the optimal solution based on the Fig. 3 Fitness value changes for the ACO parameter combination. Fig. 4 Minimum cost change of the assembly sequence. 404 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 optimal parameter combinations. By contrast, only one or two ants in the ACO algorithm ﬁnd a near-optimal assembly sequence by using the random parameter combinations. Moreover, many iterations are performed. In the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm, the SOS algorithm ensures that most ants will ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence quickly. Therefore, the stability and converge rate of the ACO algorithm are greatly improved. As shown in Table 4, although the ACO algorithm using random parameter combination IV converges quickly, the quality of the generated assembly sequence is poor. Evidently, most of the random parameter combinations cause the ACO algorithm to fall within local minima and decrease the global search capability of the ant colony. This phenomenon is consistent with the analysis result for parameter combination IV in Fig. 4. The ACO algorithm ﬁnds the optimal assembly sequence by using parameter combination III. However, the number of times and number of ants are small. In most of the other experiments, ACO converges to another near-optimal assembly sequence. Therefore, the minority cases cannot demonstrate the stability of the ACO algorithm for ASP . The comparisons indicate that the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm has higher robustness and stability than the ACO algorithm when random parameter combinations are adopted. 5.2 Optimal assembly sequence Multiple optimal assembly sequences with the same cost may exist. According to the objective function Eq. (5), the optimal assembly sequence is not unique. Optimal parameter combination 1 in Table 3 is used, and the computed optimal assembly sequence computed is shown in Table 5. The entire assembly process involves only one reori- entation, and the tool changes 13 times. All parts are stable during the assembly process. The SOS-ACO algorithm ﬁnds satisfactory optimal or near-optimal assembly sequences because multiple assembly constraints are incorporated into the assembly model. The optimal sequence guides the practical assembly process. The parameters in Eq. (5) can be changed to compute useful assembly sequences in accordance with the real-world environment. 5.3 Effect of changes in parameters m and Q on the algorithm Two parameters, m and Q, are assigned in the hybrid SOS- ACO algorithm. They may affect the performance of the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm if different values are provided. In the following experiments, we illustrate that the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm demonstrates good performance in ASP even when m and Q are assigned different values. The values of the other parameters are taken from Section 5.1. 5.3.1 Experimental results for m To study the effect of the number of ants on SOS-ACO, pheromone enhancement coef ﬁcient Q is set to 10, and number of ants m is set to 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50. The experimental results computed by the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm under this setting are shown in Table 6. Regardless of whether or not m changes, the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence quickly. When m increases, the optimal para- meter combination for ﬁnding the optimal assembly sequence also changes. Moreover, α increases with m, whereas pheromone evaporation coef ﬁcients /C26 and γ decrease. As m increases, numerous iterations are required for ACO to converge. Meanwhile, the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm improves the convergence rate by adjusting the other parameter values, which increases pheromone guidance and decreases pheromone evaporation. Hence, the impact of different m values is reduced. Table 4 Comparison of the results of running ACO under different parameter combinations Parameter combination Combination Minimum cost Cmin Number of times to ﬁnd Cmin Average minimum cost Average number of ants to ﬁnd Cmin Average minimum number of iterations to ﬁnd Cmin Optimal parameter combinations 1 41.2 7 41.5 16 17 2 41.2 8 41.4 17 22 3 41.2 8 41.8 15 32 4 41.2 6 42.3 14 17 5 41.2 8 41.5 16 27 Random parameter combinations I 41.6 1 42.8 1 44 II 42.0 3 44.2 2 53 III 41.2 1 43.3 2 48 IV 43.2 2 44.8 19 10 V 45.2 3 46.2 1 65 Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 405 5.3.2 Experimental results for Q Number of ants m is set to 20, and pheromone enhancement coef ﬁcient Q is set to 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100. The experimental results computed by the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm under this setting are shown in Table 7. Similar to the experimental results in Table 6, the hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm successfully ﬁnds the optimal assembly sequence in each experiment. Most ants converge to the minimum cost when the number of iterations does not change considerably. When Q increases, the two pheromone evaporation coef ﬁcients increase, whereas pheromone importance factor α decreases. If Q is large, pheromone accumulation will accelerate. In this case, the ACO algorithm will be likely to exhibit prematurity soon. The hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm prevents pheromone increments by weakening the gui- dance of pheromones and evaporating pheromones on the best path. By adjusting the ACO parameter values, it prohibits the ACO algorithm from falling into the local minima, thereby improving the global optimization capability. Regardless of whether or not m and Q change, the SOS algorithm can ultimately ﬁnd the optimal parameter combination that leads the ACO algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal assembly sequence. The hybrid SOS-ACO algo- rithm has a good self-adaptive capability and can cope with changes in several given parameters to guarantee good ASP performance. 5.4 Result analysis The conducted experiments indicate that the solution obtained by SOS-ACO is better than that of traditional ACO, and the former has a higher convergence rate than the latter. Thus, optimizing the parameters of the ACO algorithm improves the global optimization capability and convergence rate of ACO. The stability of the results is difﬁcult to guarantee when random parameter combina- tions are used. When optimal parameter combinations are adopted, ACO obtains the best assembly sequences in most experiments. Therefore, the stability and robustness of SOS-ACO are higher than those of ACO. In addition, the performance of SOS-ACO is analyzed in accordance with changes in two parameters, namely, number of ants m and global pheromone enhancement coef ﬁcient Q. Experi- ments show that SOS-ACO can calculate high-quality solutions even with different values of m and Q. In the optimization process, SOS-ACO identi ﬁes the best assembly sequence by adjusting the values of ACO parameters step by step. This result illustrates that SOS- ACO can adapt well to changes in several parameters. Table 5 Information on the optimal assembly sequence Part number Assembly direction Assembly tool Assembly stability Part number Assembly direction Assembly tool Assembly stability 9 + X T1 Yes 12 – X T5 Y es 3 + X T1 Yes 14 – X T5 Y es 2 + X T2 Yes 10 – X T4 Y es 7 – X T4 Yes 15 – X T3 Y es 4 – X T4 Yes 17 – X T5 Y es 6 – X T3 Yes 16 – X T5 Y es 1 – X T3 Yes 18 – X T3 Y es 5 – X T5 Yes 19 – X T1 Y es 8 – X T5 Yes 21 – X T2 Y es 11 – X T4 Yes 20 – X T2 Y es 13 – X T3 Yes Table 6 Experimental results for m m αβ /C26 γ Minimum cost Cmin Number of ants to ﬁnd Cmin Minimum number of iterations to ﬁnd Cmin 10 2.52 1.21 0.23 0.34 41.2 7 18 20 2.72 1.00 0.21 0.33 41.2 17 24 30 3.13 1.31 0.14 0.34 41.2 24 15 40 3.34 2.21 0.10 0.22 41.2 37 18 50 3.76 1.68 0.10 0.12 41.2 45 34 406 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 6 Conclusions and future research directions Multiple assembly constraints were incorporated into the assembly model, and a hybrid SOS-ACO algorithm was designed to detect the optimal or near-optimal assembly sequence. The constraints in the assembly model ensured that the algorithm would ﬁnd rational assembly sequences, which are helpful for the practical assembly process. The parameters of ACO were optimized by the SOS algorithm. The results showed that the dif ﬁculty of setting ACO parameters was greatly reduced. When several parameters were assigned, SOS-ACO demonstrated a self-adaptive capability and obtained a suitable set of optimal parameters for ASP . The experiments illustrated that SOS-ACO identiﬁed the optimal assembly sequence in nearly all experiments. This result demonstrates SOS-ACO ’s high stability and convergence rate for resolving ASP . In SOS-ACO, SOS is used to optimize the four key parameters of ACO, namely, α, β, /C26, and γ. Notably, we did not try using SOS to optimize fewer or more parameters of ACO. This research direction will be studied in the future. In addition, SOS-ACO will be applied to other combina- torial optimization problems, such as TSP . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1501302) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (Grant Nos. 2018ZD09 and 2018MS039). It is also supported by the State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, China. References 1. Boothroyd G. Product design for manufacture and assembly. Computer-Aided Design, 1994, 26(7): 505 –520 2. Lambert A J D, Gupta S M. Disassembly Modeling for Assembly, Maintenance, Reuse, and Recycling. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2004 3. Abdullah M A, Ab Rashid M F F, Ghazalli Z. Optimization of assembly sequence planning using soft computing approaches: A review. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering, 2019, 26(2): 461 –474 4. Tseng Y J, Chen J Y, Huang F Y. A multi-plant assembly sequence planning model with integrated assembly sequence planning and plant assignment using GA. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2010, 48(1 –4): 333 –345 5. Hu X Y, Gao B. Research on assembly sequence planning based on ﬂuid ﬂow mechanism. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference of Intelligent Robotic and Control Engineering (IRCE). Lanzhou: IEEE, 2018, 46 –50 6. Wang J F, Li S Q, Liu J H, et al. Computer aided assembly planning: A survey. Journal of Engineering Graphics, 2005, 2: 1 –7 (in Chinese) 7. Homem de Mello L S, Sanderson A C. A correct and complete algorithm for the generation of mechanical assembly sequences. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, 1991, 7(2): 228 – 240 8. Chen R S, Lu K Y, Tai P H. Optimisation of assembly plan through a three-stage integrated approach. International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology, 2004, 19(1): 28 –38 9. Zha X F, Lim S Y E, Fok S C. Integrated knowledge-based Petri net intelligent ﬂexible assembly planning. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 1998, 9(3): 235 –250 10. Gunji A B, Deepak B B B V L, Bahubalendruni C M V A R, et al. An optimal robotic assembly sequence planning by assembly subsets detection method using teaching learning-based optimiza- tion algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2018, 15(3): 1369 –1385 11. Jiménez P. Survey on assembly sequencing: A combinatorial and geometrical perspective. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 2013, 24(2): 235 –250 12. Pandian R S, Kamalakannan R, Sivakumar P, et al. Heuristic and meta-heuristic algorithms for solving medium and large scale sized cellular manufacturing system NP-hard problems: A comprehensive review. Materials Today: Proceedings, 2019, 21(Part 1): 66 –72 13. Huang Z Z, Zhuang Z L, Cao Q, et al. A survey of intelligent algorithms for open shop scheduling problem. Procedia CIRP , 2019, 83: 569 –574 14. Li X, Shang J Z, Cao Y J. An ef ﬁcient method of automatic assembly sequence planning for aerospace industry based on genetic algorithm. International Journa l of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2017, 90(5–8): 1307 –1315 15. Qu X T, Zhang K, Wang X X, et al. Hybrid cycle algorithm-based intelligent assembly sequence planning of complex assembly. Journal of Northeastern Unive rsity (Natural Science), 2019, 40(12): 1767 –1772 (in Chinese) 16. Wang J F, Liu J H, Zhong Y F. A novel ant colony algorithm for assembly sequence planning. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2005, 25(11 –12): 1137–1143 17. Wang H, Rong Y M, Xiang D. Mechanical assembly planning using Table 7 Experimental results for Q Q αβ /C26 γ Minimum cost Cmin Number of ants to ﬁnd Cmin Minimum number of iterations to ﬁnd Cmin 20 3.26 1.62 0.17 0.19 41.2 17 19 40 2.10 1.23 0.11 0.24 41.2 15 24 60 2.14 2.12 0.21 0.29 41.2 16 20 80 1.81 2.09 0.24 0.27 41.2 13 33 100 1.64 1.78 0.35 0.29 41.2 15 23 Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 407 ant colony optimization. Computer-Aided Design, 2014, 47: 59 –71 18. Y u J P, Wang C E. A max –min ant colony system for assembly sequence planning. International Journal of Advanced Manufactur- ing Technology, 2013, 67(9 –12): 2819 –2835 19. Wu Y J, Cao Y, Wang Q F. Assembly sequence planning method based on particle swarm algorithm. Cluster Computing, 2019, 22(S1): 835 –846 20. Lv H G, Lu C. An assembly sequence planning approach with a discrete particle swarm optimi zation algorithm . International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2010, 50(5 –8): 761–770 21. Wang Y, Liu J H. Chaotic particle swarm optimization for assembly sequence planning. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufactur- ing, 2010, 26(2): 212 –222 22. Mishra A, Deb S. Assembly sequence optimization using a ﬂower pollination algorithm-based approach. Journal of Intelligent Manu- facturing, 2019, 30(2): 461 –482 23. Bahubalendruni M V A R, Sudhakar U, Lakshmi K V V. Subassembly detection and optimal assembly sequence generation through elephant search algorithm. International Journal of Mathematical, Engineering and Management Sciences, 2019, 4(4): 998–1007 24. Abdullah A, Ab Rashid M F F, Ponnambalam S G, et al. Energy efﬁcient modeling and optimization for assembly sequence planning using moth ﬂame optimization. Assembly Automation, 2019, 39(2): 356–368 25. Ab Rashid M F F. A hybrid ant-wolf algorithm to optimize assembly sequence planning problem. Assembly Automation, 2017, 37(2): 238–248 26. Mirjalili S, Mirjalili S M, Lewis A. Grey wolf optimizer. Advances in Engineering Software, 2014, 69: 46 –61 27. Shuang B, Chen J P, Li Z B. Microrobot based micro-assembly sequence planning with hybrid ant colony algorithm. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2008, 38(11 –12): 1227–1235 28. Wang Y, Tian D. A weighted assembly precedence graph for assembly sequence planning. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2016, 83(1 –4): 99–115 29. Deng W, Xu J J, Song Y J, et al. An effective improved co-evolution ant colony optimization algorithm with multi-strategies and its application. International Journal of Bio-Inspired Computation, 2020, 16(3): 158 –170 30. Luan W J, Liu G J, Jiang C J, et al. MPTR: A maximal-marginal- relevance-based personalized trip recommendation method. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2018, 19(11): 3461–3474 31. Boukens M, Boukabou A, Chadli M. A real time self-tuning motion controller for mobile robot systems. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 2019, 6(1): 84 –96 32. Peker M, Sen B, Kumru P Y. An ef ﬁcient solving of the traveling salesman problem: The ant colony system having parameters optimized by the Taguchi method. Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, 2013, 21: 2015 –2036 33. Wang J J, Kumbasar T. Parameter optimization of interval Type-2 fuzzy neural networks based on PSO and BBBC methods. IEEE/ CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 2019, 6(1): 247 –257 34. Gao S C, Zhou M C, Wang Y R, et al. Dendritic neuron model with effective learning algorithms for classi ﬁcation, approximation, and prediction. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2019, 30(2): 601 –614 35. Botee H M, Bonabeau E. Evolving ant colony optimization. Advances in Complex Systems, 1998, 1(02n03): 149 –159 36. Mahi M, Baykan O K, Kodaz H. A new hybrid method based on particle swarm optimization, ant colony optimization and 3-Opt algorithms for traveling salesman problem. Applied Soft Comput- ing, 2015, 30: 484 –490 37. Ariyaratne M K A, Fernando T G I, Weerakoon S. A self-tuning ﬁreﬂy algorithm to tune the parameters of ant colony system. International Journal of Swarm Intelligence, 2018, 3(4): 309 –331 38. Cheng M Y, Prayogo D. Symbiotic organisms search: A new metaheuristic optimization algorithm. Computers & Structures, 2014, 139: 98 –112 39. Wang Y, Wu Y W, Xu N. Discrete symbiotic organism search with excellence coef ﬁcients and self-escape for traveling salesman problem. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 2019, 131: 269 –281 40. Panda A, Pani S. A symbiotic organisms search algorithm with adaptive penalty function to solve multi-objective constrained optimization problems. Applied Soft Computing, 2016, 46: 344 – 360 41. Smith S F, Smith G C, Liao X. Automatic stable assembly sequence generation and evaluation. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 2001, 20(4): 225 –235 42. Yin W S. Assembly design system based on engineering connection. Frontiers of Mechanical Engineering, 2016, 11(4): 423 –432 43. Lu C, Wong Y S, Fuh J Y H. An enhanced assembly planning approach using a multi-objective genetic algorithm. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Part B, Journal of Engineering Manufacture, 2006, 220(2): 255 –272 44. Bedeoui A, Hadj R B, Hammadi M, et al. Assembly sequence plan generation of heavy machines based on the stability criterion. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2019, 102(9 –12): 2745 –2755 45. Feng Y X, Zhou M C, Tian G D, et al. Target disassembly sequencing and scheme evaluation for CNC machine tools using improved multiobjective ant colony algorithm and fuzzy integral. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. Systems, 2019, 49(12): 2438 –2451 46. Hong Z X, Feng Y X, Li Z W, et al. An integrated approach for multi-objective optimisation and MCDM of energy internet under uncertainty. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2019, 97: 90 – 104 47. Feng Y X, Gao Y C, Tian G D, et al. Flexible process planning and end-of-life decision-making for product recovery optimization based on hybrid disassembly. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2019, 16(1): 311 –326 48. Dorigo M, Gambardella L M. Ant colonies for the travelling salesman problem. Bio Systems, 1997, 43(2): 73 –81 49. Dorigo M, Caro G D, Gambardella L M. Ant algorithms for discrete optimization. Arti ﬁcial Life, 1999, 5(2): 137 –172 50. Chan F T S, Swarnkar R. Ant colony optimization approach to a fuzzy goal programming model for a machine tool selection and 408 Front. Mech. Eng. 2021, 16(2): 393 –409 operation allocation problem in an FMS. Robotics and Computer- Integrated Manufacturing, 2006, 22(4): 353 –362 51. Wang D, Shao X D, Liu S M. Assembly sequence planning for reﬂector panels based on genetic algorithm and ant colony optimization. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2017, 91(1–4): 987 –997 52. Ha C H. Evolving ant colony system for large-sized integrated process planning and scheduling problem considering sequence- dependent setup times. Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal, 2020, 32(3): 523 –560 53. McGovern S M, Gupta S M. Ant colony optimization for disassembly sequencing with multiple objectives. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2006, 30(5 –6): 481–496 Zunpu HAN et al. Assembly sequence planning based on ant colony optimization 409