Nature | Vol 594 | 10 June 2021 | 207 Article A graph placement methodology for fast  chip design Azalia Mirhoseini1,4 ✉, Anna Goldie1,3,4 ✉, Mustafa Yazgan2, Joe Wenjie Jiang1,  Ebrahim Songhori1, Shen Wang1, Young-Joon Lee2, Eric Johnson1, Omkar Pathak2,  Azade Nova1, Jiwoo Pak2, Andy Tong2, Kavya Srinivasa2, William Hang3, Emre Tuncer2,  Quoc V . Le1, James Laudon1, Richard Ho2, Roger Carpenter2 & Jeff Dean1 Chip floorplanning is the engineering task of designing the physical layout of a  computer chip. Despite five decades of research1, chip floorplanning has defied  automation, requiring months of intense effort by physical design engineers to  produce manufacturable layouts. Here we present a deep reinforcement learning  approach to chip floorplanning. In under six hours, our method automatically  generates chip floorplans that are superior or comparable to those produced by  humans in all key metrics, including power consumption, performance and chip area.  T o achieve this, we pose chip floorplanning as a reinforcement learning problem, and  develop an edge-based graph convolutional neural network architecture capable of  learning rich and transferable representations of the chip. As a result, our method  utilizes past experience to become better and faster at solving new instances of the  problem, allowing chip design to be performed by artificial agents with more  experience than any human designer. Our method was used to design the next  generation of Google’s artificial intelligence (AI) accelerators, and has the potential to  save thousands of hours of human effort for each new generation. Finally, we believe  that more powerful AI-designed hardware will fuel advances in AI, creating a  symbiotic relationship between the two fields. In this work, we propose a new graph placement method based on  reinforcement learning (RL), and demonstrate state-of-the-art results  on chip floorplanning, a challenging problem2 that has long defied  automation, despite five decades of research. Our method generates  manufacturable chip floorplans in under 6 h, compared to the strongest  baseline, which requires months of intense effort by human experts. A computer chip is divided into dozens of blocks, each of which is  an individual module, such as a memory subsystem, compute unit  or control logic system. These blocks can be described by a netlist, a  hypergraph of circuit components, such as macros (memory compo- nents) and standard cells (logic gates such as NAND, NOR and XOR),  all of which are connected by wires. Chip floorplanning involves plac- ing netlists onto chip canvases (two-dimensional grids) so that per- formance metrics (for example, power consumption, timing, area  and wirelength) are optimized, while adhering to hard constraints on  density and routing congestion. Since the 1960s, many approaches to chip floorplanning have been  proposed, falling into three broad categories: partitioning-based meth- ods3–5, stochastic/hill-climbing approaches6–8 and analytic solvers9–14.  However, none of these approaches could achieve human-level perfor- mance, and the exponential growth in chip complexity has rendered  these techniques largely unusable on modern chips. The limitations of these prior approaches are varied. For example,  partitioning-based methods sacrifice the quality of the global solution  in order to scale to larger netlists, and a poor early partition may result in  an unsalvageable final result. Hill-climbing approaches have low conver- gence rates and do not scale to modern chip netlists, which have millions  or billions of nodes13. Prior to this work, analytic solvers were the leading  approach, but they can only optimize for differentiable loss functions,  meaning that they cannot effectively optimize for critical metrics, such  as routing congestion or timing violations. Our method, on the other  hand, can scale to netlists with millions of nodes, and optimizes directly  for any mixture of differentiable or non-differentiable cost functions.  Furthermore, our method improves in both speed and quality of result  because it is exposed to more instances of the chip placement problem. Owing to the limitations of these prior methods, human physical  designers must iterate for months with commercial electronic design  automation (EDA) tools, taking as input a register transfer level (RTL)  description of the chip netlist, generating a manual placement of that  netlist onto the chip canvas, and waiting up to 72 h for EDA tools to  evaluate that placement. On the basis of this feedback, the human  designer either concludes that the design criteria have been achieved,  generates an updated floorplan for evaluation, or provides feedback to  upstream RTL designers, who then modify the low-level code to make  the placement task easier (for example, resolve timing violations). T o address the chip floorplanning problem, we developed an RL  method capable of generalizing across chips—meaning that it can  learn from experience to become both better and faster at placing  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03544-w Received: 3 November 2020 Accepted: 13 April 2021 Published online: 9 June 2021  Check for updates 1Google Research, Brain Team, Google, Mountain View, CA, USA. 2Google Chip Implementation and Infrastructure (CI2) Team, Google, Sunnyvale, CA, USA. 3Computer Science Department,  Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 4These authors contributed equally: Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie. ✉e-mail: azalia@google.com; agoldie@google.com 208 | Nature | Vol 594 | 10 June 2021 Article new chips—allowing chip designers to be assisted by artificial agents  with more experience than any human could ever gain. Training placement policies that generalize across chips is extremely  challenging, because it requires learning to optimize the placement of  all possible chip netlists onto all possible canvases. Chip floorplanning is  analogous to a game with varying pieces (for example, netlist topologies,  macro counts, macro sizes and aspect ratios), boards (varying canvas sizes  and aspect ratios) and win conditions (relative importance of different  evaluation metrics or different density and routing congestion constraints).  Even one instance of this game (placing a particular netlist onto a particular  canvas) has an enormous state–action space. For example, the state space  of placing 1,000 clusters of nodes on a grid with 1,000 cells is of the order  of 1,000! (greater than 102,500), whereas Go has a state space of 10360 (ref. 15). T o enable generalization, we focused on learning transferable  representations of chips, grounding representation learning in the  supervised task of predicting placement quality. By designing a neural  architecture that can accurately predict reward across a wide variety  of netlists and their placements, we are able to generate rich feature  embeddings of the input netlists. We then use this architecture as the  encoder of our policy and value networks to enable transfer learning.  In our experiments, we show that, as our agent is exposed to a greater  volume and variety of chips, it becomes both faster and better at gen- erating optimized placements for new chip blocks, bringing us closer  to a future in which chip designers are assisted by artificial agents with  vast chip placement experience. In addition to the immediate impact on chip floorplanning, the ability  of our method to generalize and quickly generate high-quality solutions  has major implications, unlocking opportunities for co-optimization  with earlier stages of the chip design process. Large-scale architectural  explorations were previously impossible, because it took months of  human effort to accurately evaluate a given architectural candidate.  However, modifying the architectural design can have an outsized  impact on performance, and would facilitate full automation of the  chip design process. Automating and accelerating the chip design  process can also enable co-design of AI and hardware, yielding  high-performance chips customized to important workloads, such  as autonomous vehicles, medical devices and data centres. At an abstract level, our method learns to map the nodes of a hyper- graph onto a limited set of resources, subject to constraints. Place- ment optimizations of this form appear in a wide range of science and  engineering applications, including hardware design1, city planning16,  vaccine testing and distribution17, and cerebral cortex layout18. There- fore, we believe that our placement optimization methodology can be  applied to impactful placement problems beyond chip design. Beyond the experimental results reported here, our method is  already having real-world impact, and our floorplan solutions are in  the product tapeout of a recent-generation Google tensor processing  unit (TPU) accelerator. Chip floorplanning as a learning problem The underlying problem is a high-dimensional contextual bandits  problem19 but, as in prior work, such as refs. 20–23, we have chosen to  reformulate it as a sequential Markov decision process (MDP), because  this allows us to more easily incorporate the problem constraints as  described below. Our MDP consists of four key elements: (1) States encode information about the partial placement, including  the netlist (adjacency matrix), node features (width, height, type), edge  features (number of connections), current node (macro) to be placed,  and metadata of the netlist graph (routing allocations, total number  of wires, macros and standard cell clusters). (2) Actions are all possible locations (grid cells of the chip canvas)  onto which the current macro can be placed without violating any hard  constraints on density or blockages. (3) State transitions define the probability distribution over next  states, given a state and an action. (4) Rewards are 0 for all actions except the last action, where the  reward is a negative weighted sum of proxy wirelength, congestion  and density, as described below. We train a policy (an RL agent) modelled by a neural network that,  through repeated episodes (sequences of states, actions and rewards),  learns to take actions that will maximize cumulative reward (see Fig. 1).  We use proximal policy optimization (PPO)24 to update the parameters  of the policy network, given the cumulative reward for each placement. We can formally define the objective function as follows: ∑Jθ G K ER(, )= 1 [] . (1) gG gp πp g ≈ ,≈ ,θ Here J(θ, G) is the cost function. The agent is parameterized by θ. The  dataset of netlists of size K is denoted by G, with each individual netlist  in the dataset written as g. Rp,g is the episode reward of a placement  p drawn from the policy network applied to netlist g . Eg,p[Rp,g] is the  expected reward, given a netlist g and placement p drawn from the  policy distribution πθ. Rp gλ pg γp g=− Wirelength(, )− Congestion(, )− Density( ,) . (2)pg, In each iteration, the RL agent (policy network) sequentially places  the macros. Once all macros are placed, we use a force-directed  method11,25–27 to approximately place clusters of standard cells. The  reward at the end of each iteration is calculated as a linear combination  of the approximate wirelength, congestion and density (equation (2)).  In our experiments, the congestion weight λ is set to 0.01, the density  weight γ is set to 0.01 and the maximum density threshold is set to 0.6. Designing domain-adaptive policies As mentioned earlier, developing domain-adaptive policies for the  chip floorplanning problem is extremely challenging, because this  problem is analogous to a game with varying pieces, boards and win  conditions, and has an enormous state–action space. T o address this  challenge, we first focused on learning rich representations of the  state space. Our intuition was that a policy capable of the general task  of chip placement should also be able to encode the state associated  with a new unseen chip into a meaningful signal at inference time.   Agent Agent Agent Agent Force-directed method places standard cell s0 s1 s2 sT a0 a1 aT–1  r1 = 0 r2 = 0 .... rT = −Wirelength  −O × congestion  −J × density r0 = 0 RL agent places macros one at a timeChip canvas Fig. 1 | Overview of our method and training regimen. In each training  iteration, the RL agent places macros one at a time (actions, states and rewards  are denoted by ai, si and ri, respectively). Once all macros are placed, the  standard cells are placed using a force-directed method. The intermediate  rewards are zero. The reward at the end of each iteration is calculated as a linear  combination of the approximate wirelength, congestion and density, and is  provided as feedback to the agent to optimize its parameters for the next  iteration. Nature | Vol 594 | 10 June 2021 | 209 We therefore trained a neural network architecture capable of predict- ing reward on placements of new netlists, with the ultimate goal of using  this architecture as the encoder layer of our policy. T o train this supervised model, we needed a large dataset of chip place- ments and their corresponding reward labels. We therefore created a  dataset of 10,000 chip placements where the input is the state associated  with a given placement and the label is the reward for that placement. T o accurately predict the reward labels and generalize to unseen data,  we developed an edge-based graph neural network architecture, which  we call Edge-GNN (Edge-Based Graph Neural Network). The role of this  network is to embed the netlist, distilling information about the type  and connectivity of nodes into a low-dimensional vector representation  that can be used in downstream tasks. The impact of our edge-based  neural architecture on generalization is shown in Extended Data Fig. 2. In Edge-GNN, we create an initial representation of each node by  concatenating its features—including node type, width, height, x and  y coordinates, and its connectivity to other nodes. We then iteratively  perform the following updates: (1) each edge updates its representation  by applying a fully connected network to a concatenation of the two  nodes that it connects, and (2) each node updates its representation by  passing the mean of all in- and outgoing edges into another fully con- nected network. The node and edge updates are shown in equation (3). ev vw ve =f c( concat(| |) ), =m ean( ). (3) ij ei ji j ij vi j e ∈Neighbours( )i Node embeddings are denoted by vi for 1 ≤ i ≤ N, where N is the total  number of macros and standard cell clusters. Vector representations  of edges connecting nodes vi and vj are denoted as eij. fce indicates a  fully connected layer and wij e  corresponds to the learnable weight  applied to edge eij (which connects nodes i and j). The outputs of the  algorithm are the node and edge embeddings. Feature embeddings Macro  embeddings Netlist  metadata Macro  features Netlist  graph Current  macro id Edge  embeddings Reduce  mean Graph  embedding Current macro  embedding Netlist  metadata  embedding Graph conv. Index fc fc 4 × 4 × 32 8 × 8 × 16 16 × 16 × 8 32 × 32 × 4 Value network Policy network 64 × 64 × 2 fc Policy and value networks fc De- conv 128 × 128 × 1 De- conv De- conv De- conv De- conv 128 × 128 × 1 Masked  policy 128 × 128 × 1 Mask Fig. 2 | Policy and value network architecture. An embedding layer encodes  information about the netlist adjacency, node features and the current macro  to be placed. The policy and value networks then output a probability  distribution over available grid cells and an estimate of the expected reward for  the current placement, respectively. id, identification number; fc, fully  connected layer; de-conv, deconvolution layer. Table 1 | Comparisons against baselines Name Method Timing Total area (μm2) Total power (W) Wirelength (m) Congestion WNS (ps) TNS (ns) H (%) V (%) Block 1 RePlAce 374 233.7 1,693,139 3.70 52.14 1.82 0.06 Manual 136 47.6 1,680,790 3.74 51.12 0.13 0.03 Our method 84 23.3 1,681,767 3.59 51.29 0.34 0.03 Block 2 RePlAce 97 6.6 785,655 3.52 61.07 1.58 0.06 Manual 75 98.1 830,470 3.56 62.92 0.23 0.04 Our method 59 170 694,757 3.13 59.11 0.45 0.03 Block 3 RePlAce 193 3.9 867,390 1.36 18.84 0.19 0.05 Manual 18 0.2 869,779 1.42 20.74 0.22 0.07 Our method 11 2.2 868,101 1.38 20.80 0.04 0.04 Block 4 RePlAce 58 11.2 944,211 2.21 27.37 0.03 0.03 Manual 58 17.9 947,766 2.17 29.16 0.00 0.01 Our method 52 0.7 942,867 2.21 28.50 0.03 0.02 Block 5 RePlAce 156 254.6 1,477,283 3.24 31.83 0.04 0.03 Manual 107 97.2 1,480,881 3.23 37.99 0.00 0.01 Ours 68 141.0 1,472,302 3.28 36.59 0.01 0.03 Here, we compare our method with the state-of-the-art method (RePlAce14) and with manual placements using an industry-standard EDA tool. For all metrics in this table, lower is better.   H, horizontal; V, vertical. 210 | Nature | Vol 594 | 10 June 2021 Article The supervised model is trained via regression to minimize the  weighted sum of mean squared loss (negative reward). This super- vised task allowed us to find the features and architecture necessary to  generalize reward prediction across netlists. T o incorporate Edge-GNN  into our RL policy network, we removed the prediction layer and then  used it as the encoder of the policy network, as shown in Fig. 2. T o place a new netlist at inference time, we load the pre-trained  weights of the policy network and apply it to the new netlist. We refer  to placements generated by a pre-trained policy with no fine-tuning as  zero-shot placements. Such a placement can be generated in subsec- ond times, because it requires only a single forward pass through the  pre-trained policy for each macro. We can further optimize placement  quality by fine-tuning the policy network. Doing so gives us the flex- ibility to either use the pre-trained weights (which have learned a rich  representation of the input state) or further fine-tune these weights  to optimize for the properties of a particular chip netlist. Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed policy network (modelled  by πθ in equation (1)) and value network architectures. The input is the  netlist hypergraph (represented as an adjacency matrix and list of node  features), the identity of the current node to be placed, the metadata  of the netlist, and the process technology node (for example, 7 nm).  The netlist is fed into our Edge-GNN architecture to generate embed- dings of the partially placed netlist and of the current node. We use  a feed-forward network to embed the metadata. These embedding  vectors are then concatenated to form the state embedding, which  is passed to another feed-forward neural network to generate a final  representation of the state. This state is then fed into the policy net- work (composed of five deconvolutions, batch normalization28 and  rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation layers29) to generate a probabil- ity distribution over actions and into a value network (composed of  a feed-forward network) to predict the value of the input state. The  deconvolution layers have a kernel size of 3 × 3, a stride of 2, and 16, 8,  4, 2 and 1 filter channels. Empirical evaluation In this section, we evaluate the ability of our method to generalize,  explore the impact of using pre-trained policies and compare our  method to state-of-the-art baselines. We also inspect the visual appear- ance of generated placements and provide insights into the behaviour  of our policy. In terms of resource usage, for pre-training we used the same number  of workers as blocks in the training dataset (for example, for the largest  training set with 20 blocks, we pre-trained with 20 workers) and the  pre-training runtime was 48 h. T o generate the fine-tuning results in  Table 1, our method ran on 16 workers for up to 6 h, but the runtime was  often considerably lower owing to early stopping. For both pre-training  and fine-tuning, a worker consists of an Nvidia Volta graphics process- ing unit (GPU) and 10 central processing units (CPUs), each with 2 GB  of RAM. For the zero-shot mode (applying a pre-trained policy to a new  netlist with no fine-tuning), we can generate a placement in less than  a second on a single GPU. Domain adaptation results Figure  3 compares the quality of placements generated using  pre-trained policies to those generated by training the policy from  scratch. The training dataset is composed of blocks of TPU and of the  open-source Ariane RISC-V CPU30. In each experiment, we pre-train the  policy on all blocks except for the target block on which we evaluate.  We show results for the zero-shot mode, as well as after fine-tuning the  pre-trained policy on a particular design for 2 h and 12 h. The policy trained from scratch takes much longer to converge, and  even after 24 h the results (as evaluated by the reward function) are worse  than what the fine-tuned policy achieves in 12 h. This demonstrates  that exposure to many different designs during pre-training enables  faster generation of higher-quality placements for new unseen blocks. Figure 4 shows the convergence plots for training from scratch versus  training from a pre-trained policy network for Ariane RISC-V CPU30.  Not only does the pre-trained policy start with a lower placement cost,  but it also converges more than 30 h faster than the policy trained  from scratch. Learning from larger datasets. In the following, we explore the   impact of the training data on the learning ability of our policy. TPU  chip blocks are quite diverse, and we carefully selected blocks across  a representative range of functionalities (for example, on-chip and  inter-chip network blocks, computation cores, memory controllers,  data transport buffers and logic, and various interface controllers),  saturations (ratio of total area of macros to that of the canvas, <30%,  30–60% and >60%) and macro counts (up to 107). The small train - ing set contains 2 blocks, the medium set contains 5 blocks and the  large one contains 20 blocks. As we pre-train on more chip blocks, we  are able to more quickly generate higher quality placements for new  Blocks Placement cost 0 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 TPU Block 1 TPU Block 2T PU Block 3 TPU Block 4 Ariane RISC-V CPU  Zero-shot: sub-second Fine-tuned for 2 h Fine-tuned for 12 h From scratch for 24 h Fig. 3 | Training from scratch versus fine-tuning for varying amounts of  time. For each block, we show zero-shot results, results after fine-tuning for 2 h  and 12 h, and results for policies trained from scratch. As can be seen in the  table, the pre-trained policy network consistently outperforms the policy  network trained from scratch, demonstrating the effectiveness of learning  from training data offline. Training time (h) Placement cost 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 01 02 03 04 0 Train policy from scratch Fine-tune a pre-trained policy Fig. 4 | Convergence plots on Ariane RISC-V CPU. Placement cost of training a  policy network from scratch versus fine-tuning a pre-trained policy network  for a block of Ariane RISC-V CPU. Density weight was set to 0.1 and congestion  weight to 0. Nature | Vol 594 | 10 June 2021 | 211 unseen chip blocks. Figure 5 shows the impact of a larger training set  on performance. As we increase the training set from 2 to 5 blocks, and  finally to 20 blocks, the policy network generates better placements  both at zero-shot and after being fine-tuned for the same number of  hours. This suggests that as we expose the policy network to a greater  variety of distinct chip designs, it becomes less prone to overfitting  and better at generalizing to new unseen designs. Comparing with baseline methods. In this section, we compare our  method with the state-of-the-art RePlAce14 and with the production  design of the previous generation of TPU, which was generated by a  team of human physical designers. The results are shown in Table 1. T o perform a fair comparison, we ensured that all methods had the  same experimental setup, including the same inputs and the same  EDA tool settings. We note that we ran all of the evaluations of RePlAce  and our method ourselves, but we relied on the TPU physical design  team to share metrics for their best-performing manual placements,  and they may have evaluated with a slightly different EDA version. For  more details, see Extended Data Table 1. For our method, we use a policy pre-trained on the largest dataset   (20 TPU blocks) and then fine-tune it on five target unseen blocks  (denoted as blocks 1–5) for no more than 6 h. For confidentiality rea- sons, we cannot disclose the details of these blocks, but each contains  up to 131 macros and millions of standard cells. When evaluating the quality of a chip floorplan, there are several  metrics that are important and that trade off against each other. There  is no single metric that can be used to capture the overall quality of a  placement, so we report all key metrics, including the total wirelength,  timing, routing congestion (horizontal and vertical), area and power.  Timing is reported via total negative slack (TNS) and worst negative slack  (WNS). Negative slack is a measure of the extent to which the latency  of the signal exceeds the expected latency. Timing and congestion are  constraints, whereas wirelength, power and area are metrics to optimize. T o compare with RePlAce, which has a different objective function,  we treat the output of a commercial EDA tool as ground truth. T o per- form this comparison, we fix the macro placements generated by our  method and by RePlAce, and allow the commercial EDA tool to further  optimize the standard cell placements with settings drawn from our  production workflow. We used the version of RePLAce provided in  ref. 31, based on the version of the code published on 9 January 2020.  Except for the density threshold (where RePlAce benefited from a lower  threshold than its default), we used the default settings and did not use  the timing-driven capability of RePlAce. As shown in Table 1 , our method outperforms RePlAce in gener - ating placements that meet design criteria. Although RePlAce is  faster and runs in under an hour on a single Intel CPU of 3.7 GHz,  the placements are generally of lower quality. Given the constraints  imposed by the underlying process technology node, placements  will not be able to meet timing constraints in the later stages of the  design flow if WNS is considerably above 150 ps or if the horizontal  or vertical congestion is over 1%, rendering many RePlAce place- ments (blocks 1, 2, 3) unusable. These results demonstrate that our  approach is effective in generating high-quality placements that  meet design criteria. Table 1 also shows the results for the manual baseline, which is the  actual production design of the previous TPU chip. This baseline was  generated by the TPU’s physical design team, and involved many itera- tions of placement optimization, guided by feedback from a commer- cial EDA tool over a period of several months. Both our method and  human experts consistently generate viable placements that meet  timing and congestion requirements. However, our method also out- performs or matches manual placements in area, power and wirelength.  Furthermore, our end-to-end learning-based approach takes far less  time to meet design criteria. Conclusion In this work, we propose an RL-based approach to chip floorplanning  that enables domain adaptation. The RL agent becomes better and  faster at floorplanning optimization as it places a greater number of  chip netlists. We show that our method can generate chip floorplans  that are comparable or superior to human experts in under six hours,  whereas humans take months to produce acceptable floorplans for  modern accelerators. Our method has been used in production to  design the next generation of Google TPU. Online content Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum- maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information,  acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contri- butions and competing interests; and statements of data and code avail- ability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03544-w. 1. Markov, I. L., Hu, J. & Kim, M. Progress and challenges in VLSI placement research. Proc.  IEEE 103, 1985–2003 (2015). 2. Tang, M. & Yao, X. A memetic algorithm for VLSI floorplanning. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man  Cybern. B 37, 62–69 (2007). 3. Breuer, M. A. A class of min-cut placement algorithms. In Proc. 14th Design Automation  Conference (DAC 1977) 284–290 (IEEE, 1977). 4. Fiduccia, C. M. & Mattheyses, R. M. A linear-time heuristic for improving network  partitions. In 19th Design Automation Conference 175–181 (IEEE, 1982). 5. Roy, J. A., Papa, D. A. & Markov, I. L. in Modern Circuit Placement (eds Nam, G.-J. &   Cong, J. J.) 97–133 (Springer, 2007). 6. Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C. D. & Vecchi, M. P. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science  220, 671–680 (1983). 7. Sechen, C. M. & Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, A. L. TimberWolf3.2: a new standard cell  placement and global routing package. In 23rd ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference  432–439 (IEEE, 1986). 8. Sarrafzadeh, M., Wang, M. & Yang, X. in Modern Placement Techniques 57–89 (Springer,  2003). 9. Luo, T. & Pan, D. Z. DPlace2.0: a stable and efficient analytical placement based on  diffusion. In 2008 Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference 346–351   (IEEE, 2008). 10. Hu, B. & Marek-Sadowska, M. Multilevel fixed-point-addition-based VLSI placement.   IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 24, 1188–1203 (2005). 11. Viswanathan, N., Pan, M. & Chu, C. in Modern Circuit Placement (eds Nam, G.-J. &   Cong, J. J.) 193–228 (Springer, 2007). 12. Kim, M., Lee, D., Markov, I. L. & Sim, P. L. An effective placement algorithm. IEEE Trans.  Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 31, 50–60 (2012). 13. Lu, J. et al. ePlace: electrostatics-based placement using fast Fourier transform and  Nesterov’s Method. ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. 20, 17 (2015). 14. Cheng, C.-K., Kahng, A. B., Kang, I. & Wang, L. RePlAce: advancing solution quality and  routability validation in global placement. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integrated  Circ. Syst. 38, 1717–1730 (2019). 15. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 550,   354–359 (2017). 16. Aslam, B., Amjad, F. & Zou, C. C. Optimal roadside units placement in urban areas for  vehicular networks. In 2012 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC)  000423–000429 (IEEE, 2012). Placement cost 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200 0.225 0.250 Zero-shot  0 h Fine-tune  10 h Fine-tune  20 h Fine-tune  30 h Fine-tune  40 h Small dataset (2 blocks) Medium dataset (5 blocks)L arge dataset (20 blocks) Fig. 5 | Effect of pre-training dataset size. We pre-train the policy network on  three different training datasets (the small dataset is a subset of the medium  one, and the medium dataset is a subset of the large one). We then fine-tune this  pre-trained policy network on the test block and report cost at various training  durations. As the dataset size increases, both the time to convergence and the  quality of generated placements increase. 212 | Nature | Vol 594 | 10 June 2021 Article 17. Medlock, J. & Galvani, A. P. Optimizing influenza vaccine distribution. Science 325,   1705–1708 (2009). 18. Cherniak, C., Mokhtarzada, Z., Rodriguez-Esteban, R. & Changizi, K. Global optimization  of cerebral cortex layout. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 1081–1086 (2004). 19. Langford, J. & Zhang, T. The Epoch-Greedy algorithm for multi-armed bandits with side  information. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Vol. 20, 817–824 (2008). 20. Usunier, N., Synnaeve, G., Lin, Z. & Chintala, S. Episodic exploration for deep deterministic  policies: an application to starcraft micromanagement tasks. In Proc. International  Conference on Learning Representations (2017). 21. Bello, I., Pham, H., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M. & Bengio, S. Neural combinatorial optimization  with reinforcement learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09940 (2016). 22. Mirhoseini, A. et al. Device placement optimization with reinforcement learning. In Proc.  International Conference on Machine Learning 2430–2439 (PMLR, 2017). 23. Mirhoseini, A. et al. A hierarchical model for device placement. In Proc. International  Conference on Learning Representations (2018). 24. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A. & Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization  algorithms. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347 (2017). 25. Obermeier, B., Ranke, H. & Johannes, F. M. Kraftwerk: a versatile placement   approach. In Proc. 2005 International Symposium on Physical Design 242–244   (ACM, 2005). 26. Spindler, P., Schlichtmann, U. & Johannes, F. M. Kraftwerk2 – a fast force-directed  quadratic placement approach using an accurate net model. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided  Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 27, 1398–1411 (2008). 27. Viswanathan, N. et al. RQL: global placement via relaxed quadratic spreading and  linearization. In Proc. Design Automation Conference 453–458 (ACM/IEEE, 2007). 28. Ioffe, S. & Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: accelerating deep network training by  reducing internal covariate shift. In Proc. 32nd International Conference on Machine  Learning 448–456 (JMLR, 2015). 29. Nair, V. & Hinton, G. E. Rectified linear units improve restricted Boltzmann machines. In  Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning 807–814 (Omnipress, 2010). 30. Zaruba, F. & Benini, L. The cost of application-class processing: energy and performance  analysis of a Linux-ready 1.7-GHz 64-Bit RISC-V core in 22-nm FDSOI technology. IEEE  Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. VLSI Syst. 27, 2629–2640 (2019). 31. RePlAce software – the OpenROAD project https://github.com/The-OpenROAD-Project/ RePlAce (2020). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations. Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this  article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author  self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the  terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2021, corrected  publication 2022, 2024 Methods In the following, we provide details of the proposed methodologies. Problem statement In this work, we target the chip floorplanning problem, in which the  objective is to map the nodes of a netlist (a hypergraph describing the  chip) onto a chip canvas (a bounded two-dimensional space), so that  final power, performance and area (PPA) is optimized. In this section,  we provide an overview of how we formulate the problem as an RL prob- lem, followed by a detailed description of the reward function, action  and state representations, policy architecture, and policy updates. Overview of our approach We take a deep RL approach to the chip floorplanning problem, in which  an RL agent (policy network) sequentially places the macros. Once all  macros are placed, we use a force-directed (FD) method11,25–27 to place  clusters of standard cells, as shown in Fig. 1. In this section, we define the reward r, state s, actions a, policy net- work architecture πθ(a|s) parameterized by θ, and finally the optimiza- tion method that we use to train those parameters. In our setting, at the  initial state, s0, we have an empty chip canvas and an unplaced netlist.  At each step one macro is placed, and the final state, sT, corresponds  to a completely placed netlist. Thus, T is equal to the total number of  macros in the netlist. At each time step t, the agent begins in state st,  takes an action (at), arrives at a new state (st+1), and receives a reward  (rt) from the environment (0 for t < T and negative proxy cost for t = T). We define st to be a concatenation of features representing the state  at time t, including a graph embedding of the netlist (including both  placed and unplaced nodes), a node embedding of the current macro  to place, metadata about the netlist, and a mask representing the fea- sibility of placing the current node onto each cell of the grid. The action space is all valid placements of the tth macro, which is a  function of the density mask. Action at is the cell placement of the tth  macro predicted by the RL policy network. st+1 is the next state, which  includes an updated representation containing information about the  newly placed macro, an updated density mask and an embedding for  the next node to be placed. In our formulation, rt is 0 for every time  step except for the final, rT, where it is a weighted sum of approximate  wirelength, congestion and density. Through repeated episodes (sequences of states, actions and  rewards), the policy network learns to take actions that will maximize  cumulative reward. We use PPO24 to update the parameters of the policy  network, given the cumulative reward for each placement. Detailed methodology Our goal is to minimize PPA, subject to constraints on routing conges- tion and density. Our true reward is the output of a commercial EDA  tool, including wirelength, routing congestion, density, power, timing  and area. However, RL policies require 10,000s of examples to learn  effectively, so it is critical that the reward function be fast to evaluate,  ideally running in a few milliseconds. In order to be effective, these  approximate reward functions must also be positively correlated with  the true reward. Therefore, a component of our cost is wirelength,  because it is not only much cheaper to evaluate, but also correlates  with power and performance (timing). T o combine multiple objectives into a single reward function that  can be optimized, we take the weighted sum of proxy wirelength,  congestion and density, where the weights can be used to explore the  trade-off between these metrics. While we treat congestion as a soft  constraint (that is, lower congestion improves the reward function),  we treat density as a hard constraint, masking out actions (grid cells  to place nodes onto) the density of which exceeds the target density. T o keep the runtime per iteration small, we apply several approxima- tions to the calculation of the reward function: (1) We group millions of standard cells into a few thousand clusters  using hMETIS32, a partitioning technique based on the minimum cut  objective. Once all macros are placed, we use an FD method to place  the standard cell clusters. Doing so enables us to generate an approxi- mate but fast standard cell placement that facilitates policy network  optimization. (2) We discretize the grid to a few thousand grid cells and place the cen- tre of macros and standard cell clusters onto the centre of the grid cells. (3) When calculating wirelength, we make the simplifying assumption  that all wires leaving a standard cell cluster originate at the centre of  the cluster. (4) T o calculate the routing congestion cost, we consider only the aver- age congestion of the top 10% most congested grid cells. A chip netlist typically consists of hundreds of macros and millions  of standard cells. Owing to their negligible area, standard cells can be  approximated as points with zero area, allowing for analytic solvers to  optimally place them with a small margin of error. Macros, on the other  hand, have much larger area and cannot be optimally placed with these  same analytic techniques. We chose to target macro placement, as it is  a much more challenging problem, which previously required human  experts to iterate for months to generate a high-quality placement. Synthesis of the input netlist. We use a commercial tool to synthesize  the netlist from RTL. Synthesis is physical-aware, in the sense that it  has access to the floorplan size and the locations of the input/output  pins, which were informed by inter- and intra-block-level information. Selection of grid rows and columns. Given the dimensions of the  chip canvas, there are many choices to discretize the two-dimensional  canvas into grid cells. This decision affects the difficulty of optimization  and the quality of the final placement. We limit the maximum number  of rows and columns to 128. We treat choosing the optimal number of  rows and columns as a bin-packing problem and rank different combi- nations of rows and columns by the amount of wasted space that they  incur. We use an average of 30 rows and columns in our experiments. Selection of macro order. T o select the order in which the macros  are placed, we sort macros by descending size and break ties using a  topological sort. By placing larger macros first, we reduce the chance  of there being no feasible placement for a later macro. The topological  sort can help the policy network learn to place connected nodes close  to one another. Another potential approach would be to learn to joint- ly optimize the ordering of macros and their placement, making the  choice of which node to place next part of the action space. However,  this enlarged action space would considerably increase the complexity  of the problem, and we found that this heuristic worked in practice. Clustering of standard cells. T o quickly place standard cells to pro- vide a signal to our RL policy, we first cluster millions of standard cells  into a few thousand clusters. There has been a large body of work on  clustering for chip netlists33–38. As has been suggested in the literature39,  such clustering helps not only with reducing the problem size, but also  helps to ‘prevent mistakes’ (for example, prevents timing paths from  being split apart). We also provide the clustered netlist to each of the  baseline methods with which we compare. T o perform this clustering,  we employed a standard open-source library, hMETIS39, which is based  on multilevel hypergraph partitioning schemes with two important  phases: (1) coarsening phase, and 2) uncoarsening and refinement  phase. After clustering with hMETIS, we rebalance cluster sizes using  heuristics based on an initial placement from physical synthesis, the  previous step in the chip design process. Generation of adjacency matrix. T o convert the netlist hypergraph  into an adjacency matrix that can be consumed by the Edge-GNN en- coder, we apply the following transformation. For each pair of nodes  Article in the clustered netlist (either macros or clusters of standard cells), we  generate an edge in the adjacency matrix with the following weight.   If the register distance between the two nodes is greater than 4, then no  edge is created. Otherwise, we apply an exponentially decaying weight  as the distance grows, starting with 1 if the distance is 0 and halved with  each additional unit of distance. Placement of standard cells. T o place standard cell clusters, we use  an approach similar to classic FD methods40. We represent the netlist  as a system of springs that apply force to each node, according to the  weight × distance formula, causing tightly connected nodes to be at- tracted to one another. We also introduce a repulsive force between  overlapping nodes to reduce placement density. After applying all  forces, we move nodes in the direction of their force vector. T o reduce  oscillations, we set a maximum distance for each move. Postprocessing. T o prepare the placements for evaluation by a com- mercial EDA tool, we perform a simple legalization step to snap macros  to the nearest power grid. We then fix the macro placements and use  an EDA tool to place the standard cells and evaluate the placement. Reward Wirelength. Following the literature40–43, we employ the half-perimeter  wirelength (HPWL), the most commonly used approximation for wire- length. HPWL is defined as the half-perimeter of the bounding boxes  for all nodes in the netlist. The HPWL for a given net (edge) i is: ix x yy HPWL() =( max{ }− min{ }+ 1) +( max{ }− min{ }+ 1). (4) bi bb ib bi b bi b ∈∈ ∈∈ Here xb and yb are the x and y coordinates of the end points of net i. The  overall HPWL cost is then calculated by taking the normalized sum of  all half-perimeter bounding boxes, as shown in equation (5). Here q(i)  is a normalization factor that improves the accuracy of the estimate by  increasing the wirelength cost as the number of nodes increases, where  Nnetlist is the number of nets. We calculate the total HPWL as follows: ∑ qi iHPWL(netlist)= () HPWL() . (5) i N =1 netlist The wirelength also has the advantage of correlating with other  important metrics, such as power and timing. Although our method  does not optimize directly for these other metrics, it generates place- ments that meet design criteria with respect to power and timing (as  shown in Table 1). Routing congestion. We also followed convention in calculating proxy  congestion44, using a simple deterministic routing based on the locations  of the driver and loads on the net. The routed net occupies a certain  portion of available routing resources (determined by the underlying  semiconductor fabrication technology) for each grid cell through which  it passes. We keep track of vertical and horizontal allocations in each grid  cell separately. T o smooth the congestion estimate, we run 5 × 1 convolu- tional filters in both the vertical and horizontal direction. After all nets  are routed, we take the average of the top 10% congestion values, drawing  inspiration from the ABA10 metric in MAPLE44. The congestion cost in  equation (2) is the top 10% average congestion calculated by this process. Density. We treat density as a hard constraint, disallowing the policy  network from placing macros in locations that would cause density to  exceed the target (maxdensity) or that would result in infeasible macro  overlap. This approach has two benefits: (1) it reduces the number of  invalid placements generated by the policy network, and (2) it reduces  the search space of the optimization problem, making it more compu- tationally tractable. A feasible placement of a standard cell cluster must meet the fol- lowing criterion: the density of placed items in each grid cell must not  exceed a given target density threshold (maxdensity). We set this threshold  to be 0.6 in our experiments to avoid over-utilization, which would  render placements unusable. T o meet this constraint, during each  RL step, we calculate the current density mask, a binary m × n matrix  representing grid cells onto which we can place the centre of the cur- rent node without violating the density threshold. Before selecting an  action, we first take the dot product of the mask and the policy network  output and then sample from the resulting probability distribution over  feasible locations. This approach prevents the policy network from  generating placements with overlapping macros or dense standard  cell areas. We also enable blockage-aware placements (such as clock  straps) by setting the density function of the blocked areas to 1. Action representation For policy optimization purposes, we convert the canvas into an m × n  grid. Thus, for any given state, the action space (or the output of the  policy network) is the probability distribution of placements of the  current macro over the m × n grid. The action is then sampled from  this probability distribution. State representation Our state contains information about the adjacency matrix correspond- ing to the clustered netlist, its node features (width, height, type), edge  features (number of connections), current node (macro) to be placed,  and metadata of the netlist and the underlying technology (for exam- ple, routing allocations, total number of wires, macros and standard  cell clusters). Next, we discuss how we process these features to learn  effective representations for the chip floorplanning problem. Enabling transfer learning T o discover domain-adaptive architectures, we propose grounding  the policy architecture search in the supervised task of predicting the  value of reward functions. We take this approach because exploration  would be far costlier in an RL setting, and the underlying complexity of  training a domain-adaptive policy network would be prohibitively high,  as it involves an immense state space encompassing all possible place- ments of all possible chips. Furthermore, different netlists and grid  sizes can have very different properties, including differing numbers of  nodes, macro sizes, netlist topologies and canvas widths and heights. The intuition behind this approach is that a policy network archi- tecture capable of transferring placement optimization across chips  should also be able to encode the state associated with a new unseen  chip into a meaningful signal at inference time. We therefore propose  training a neural network architecture capable of predicting reward  on new netlists, with the ultimate goal of using this architecture as the  encoder layer of our policy network. T o train this supervised model, we needed a large dataset of chip  floorplans and their corresponding reward labels. We therefore created  a dataset of 10,000 chip floorplans where the input is the state associ- ated with a given floorplan and the label is the reward for that floorplan  (wirelength and congestion). We built this dataset by generating 2,000  floorplans for each of five TPU blocks. T o collect diverse floorplans,  we trained a vanilla policy network with various congestion weights  (ranging from 0 to 1) and random seeds, and collected snapshots of  floorplans throughout the course of policy training. An untrained policy  network starts off with random weights and the generated floorplans  are of low quality, but as the policy network trains, the quality of gener- ated floorplans improves, allowing us to gather a diverse dataset with  floorplans of varying quality. T o train a supervised model capable of accurately predicting wirelength  and congestion labels and generalizing to unseen data, we developed a  graph neural network architecture (Edge-GNN) to embed information  about the netlist. The role of Edge-GNN is to distill information about  the type and connectivity of a node into a low-dimensional vector rep- resentation that can be used in downstream tasks. Some examples of  such downstream tasks are node classification45, device placement46,  link prediction47 and design rule check (DRC) violations prediction48. We create a vector representation of each node by first concate- nating its features, including node type, width, height, and x  and y  coordinates. We also pass node adjacency information as input to our  algorithm. We then repeatedly perform the following updates: (1) each  edge updates its representation by applying a fully connected network  to an aggregated representation of intermediate node embeddings,  and (2) each node updates its representation by taking the mean of  adjacent edge embeddings. The node and edge updates are shown in   equation (3). Node embeddings are denoted by vi for 1 ≤ i ≤ N, where N is the total  number of macros and standard cell clusters. The vector representa- tions of the edge connecting nodes vi and vj is represented as eij. Both  edge (eij) and node (vi) embeddings are 32-dimensional. vi is initialized  by passing the node features (type, width, height, x , y) through a  feed-forward network. fce is a 65 × 32 feed-forward network and wij e is  a 1 × 1 weight corresponding to the number of nets between adjacent  nodes. Neighbours(vi) denotes the neighbours of vi. The outputs of  the algorithm are the node and edge embeddings. Our supervised model consists of the following. (1) The graph neural  network (Edge-GNN) described earlier, which embeds information  about node type and the netlist adjacency matrix. (2) A fully connected  feed-forward network that embeds netlist metadata, including informa- tion about the underlying semiconductor technology (horizontal and  vertical routing capacity), the total number of nets (edges), macros, and  standard cell clusters, canvas size and number of rows and columns in  the grid. (3) A fully connected feed-forward network (the prediction  layer) whose input is a concatenation of the netlist adjacency matrix  and metadata embeddings, and whose output is the reward predic- tion. The netlist embedding is created by applying a reduced mean  function on the edge embeddings. The supervised model is trained via  regression to minimize the weighted sum of the mean squared loss of  wirelength and congestion. This supervised task allowed us to find the features and architecture  necessary to generalize reward prediction across netlists. T o incorpo- rate this architecture into our policy network, we simply removed the  prediction layer and then used the remaining network as the encoder  of the policy network, as shown in Fig. 2. T o handle different grid sizes corresponding to different choices of  rows and columns, we set the grid size to 128 × 128, and mask the unused  L-shaped section for grid sizes smaller than 128 rows and columns. T o  place a new test netlist at inference time, we load the pre-trained weights  of the policy network and apply it to the new netlist. We refer to place- ments generated by a pre-trained policy network with no fine-tuning  as zero-shot placements. Such a placement can be generated in less  than a second, because it requires only a single inference step of the  pre-trained policy network for each macro. We can further optimize  placement quality by fine-tuning the policy network, meaning that we  have the option to either use the pre-trained weights (which have learned  a rich representation of the input state) directly at inference or further  fine-tune these weights to optimize for the properties of a particular   chip netlist. Policy network architecture Figure 1 depicts an overview of the policy network (modelled by πθ in  equation (1) and the value network architecture that we developed for  chip floorplanning. The input to these networks is the adjacency matrix  and node features corresponding to the netlist hypergraph, the identity  of the current node to be placed, and the metadata of the netlist and  the semiconductor technology. The netlist is passed through our graph  neural network architecture (Edge-GNN) as described earlier. Edge-GNN  generates embeddings of (1) the partially placed hypergraph and   (2) the current node. We use a simple feed-forward network to embed   (3) the metadata. These three embedding vectors are then concat - enated to form the state embedding, which is passed to a feed-forward  neural network. The output of the feed-forward network is then fed into  the policy network (composed of five deconvolutions, batch normaliza- tion, and ReLU activation layers) to generate a probability distribution  over actions and passed to a value network (composed of a feed-forward  network) to predict the value of the input state. Policy network update: training parameters θ. In equation (1), the  objective is to train a policy network πθ that maximizes the expected  value (E) of the reward (Rp,g) over the policy network’s placement dis- tribution. T o optimize the parameters of the policy network, we use  PPO24 with a clipped objective as shown below: Lθ Er θA rθ εε A() = ˆ [min(( ) ˆ ,c lip( () ,1 −, 1+ ) ˆ )],tt tt t CLIP where Eˆt represents the expected value at timestep t, rt is the ratio of  the new policy and the old policy, and Aˆt is the estimated advantage at  timestep t. Experimental setup T o perform a fair comparison, we ensured that our method and all base- line methods had access to the same inputs and the same evaluation  settings. Extended Data Fig. 1 shows the flow that we used to conduct  the evaluations. Once each method finishes placing the netlist, the macro locations  are frozen and snapped to the power grid. Next, the EDA tool performs  standard cell placement. The settings for the EDA tool are drawn directly  from our production flow and thus we cannot share all details. The final  metrics in Table 1 are reported after PlaceOpt, meaning that global  routing has been performed by the EDA tool. Clustering standard cells allowed our method to more effectively  optimize the placement of macros. We therefore gave RePlAce access to  clustered standard cells and found that its performance also improved,  so we reported results of RePlAce on the netlist with clustered standard  cells. Although RePlAce has a default density threshold of 1.0, we found  that our setting of 0.6 resulted in better performance, so that is what  we used to report RePlAce performance. In all other cases, we used the  default settings and cost functions for RePlAce. For reproducibility, we  provide all architectural details and hyperparameter settings for our  RL algorithm in Extended Data Table 1, as well as for the FD method  used to place standard cells in Extended Data Table 2. The deconvolutions layers have a 3 × 3 kernel size with stride 2 and  16, 8, 4, 2 and 1 filter channels. T o cluster the standard cells for each  chip block, we used hMETIS 32, which partitions millions of standard  cells into thousands of clusters. The hyperparameters for hMETIS  are listed in Extended Data Table 3. For all other hMETIS hyperparam- eters, we simply use the default settings (see the hMETIS manual 49  for the values of these defaults and for more detailed information  about each hyperparameter). We note that we use a licensed version  of hMETIS but, to our knowledge, the same features are available in  the open-source version. T o avoid overfitting, we employ an early stopping mechanism that  halts RL training once the policy converges. More precisely, training  stops when it has been two hours since the evaluation return improved  by at least 0.5% over the best return so far. Open-source benchmark: Ariane RISC-V For the Ariane benchmark, we used the following open-source design30  (https://github.com/pulp-platform/ariane) and mapped all logical  memories to physical memories of size 256 × 16, resulting in 133 mac- ros. In Extended Data Fig. 4, we compare a placement generated by our  method trained from scratch and one that was generated in zero-shot  mode by a pre-trained policy. Article Use in a production setting Our method was used in the product tapeout of a recent Google TPU.  We fully automated the placement process through PlaceOpt, at which  point the design was sent to a third party for post-placement optimiza- tion, including detailed routing, clock tree synthesis and post-clock  optimization. This is a standard practice for many hardware teams,  and physical designers spend months iterating with commercial EDA  tools to produce designs that meet the strict requirements to move  to this next stage. In the production flow, we use the same RL method described in  Table 1 and the same EDA workflow to place standard cells. Although  the RL placements were already comparable to manual designs, we  performed an additional fine-tuning step with simulated annealing  (SA) to further boost performance, which helped to improve macro  orientation, as we do not currently perform macro mirroring in RL.  Adding this fine-tuning step improved wirelength by an average of  1.07% (s.d. = 0.04%), slightly reduced timing (average 1.18 ns reduc- tion in TNS; s.d. = 2.4 ns) and negligibly affected congestion (less than  0.02% variation in vertical or horizontal congestion in all cases). The  resulting end-to-end runtime was 8 h on average. Since that produc- tion launch, we have replaced SA in our production workflow with  a greedy postprocessing step that tunes the macro orientation in a  few minutes, considerably reducing our end-to-end runtime without  degrading quality. Impact of cost trade-offs In Extended Data Table 4, we perform an ablation study to examine the  impact of congestion weight on the quality of post-PlaceOpt results  (final quality of result from the commercial EDA tool). As expected,  increasing congestion weight improves both horizontal and vertical  congestion up to a point, but results in wirelength degradation, due  to the inherent trade-off between these two metrics. A congestion  weight of 0.1 represents a ‘sweet spot’ in this case, as routing conges- tion is already low but wirelength has not yet overly degraded, which  together contribute to lower TNS and WNS as well. Robustness to noise T o demonstrate the sensitivity of our method to noise, we performed  eight runs of fine-tuning on the Ariane RISC-V block, each time with a  different random seed, and we report the results (in proxy wirelength,  congestion and density) in Extended Data Table 5. Our evaluations  demonstrate that the choice of random seed had negligible impact on  all the metrics, including proxy wirelength, congestion and density,  with a standard deviation of 0.0022 in the overall cost across all runs. Generalization versus training data As we train on more chip blocks, we are able to speed up the  fine-tuning process on new blocks and generate higher-quality results  faster. As discussed earlier, as we increase the training set from 2  blocks (small dataset) to 5 blocks (medium dataset) and finally to  20 blocks (large dataset), the policy network generates better place - ments both at zero-shot and after being fine-tuned for the same  number of hours. Extended Data Fig. 3 shows the placement cost  on one test block (a TPU block not included in training) as the policy  network is being pre-trained. We can see that for the small training  dataset, the policy network quickly overfits to the training data and  performance on the test data degrades, whereas it takes longer for  the policy network to overfit on the largest dataset, and the policy  network pre-trained on this larger dataset yields better results on the  test data. This plot suggests that as we expose the policy network to  a greater variety of different training blocks, it will take longer for  the policy network to pre-train, but the policy network will become  less prone to overfitting and better at finding optimized placements  for new unseen blocks. Insights and visualizations Here we share some observations about our method’s behaviour that  may provide insight into the metrics in Table  1. One observation is  that the RL policy tends to place macros on the same datapath close to  each other, which results in better timing performance. The Edge-GNN  encoder embeds the features of each node by iteratively averaging and  applying nonlinear transformations to the node’s k-hop neighbouring  nodes and edges, where k is the number of iterations applied. Therefore,  one hypothesis is that the representation of nodes in a given datapath  are similar to one another, causing our policy network to generate  similar predictions about where they should be placed on the canvas.  This naturally results in nodes in the same datapath being placed near  to one another, improving timing performance. Another observation is that our policy learns to reserve sufficient  area for the subsequent placement of standard cells, as this effectively  optimizes its reward function. Even at zero-shot (meaning that we run  inference on our policy network in less than one second), our method  already exhibits this behaviour, as shown in Extended Data Fig. 4. Extended Data Fig. 5 juxtaposes a placement generated by a human  physical designer (on the left) with that of our method (on the right) for  a recent TPU block. The white area shows the macro placements and  the green area shows the standard cell placements. Our method cre- ates donut-shaped placements of macros surrounding standard cells,  which results in a reduction in the total wirelength. These placement  images are blurred to preserve confidentiality. Comparing with simulated annealing In the main text, we compare our method with two baselines: the  academic state-of-the-art RePlAce and human expert placements. In  this section, we provide an additional comparison with SA. T o gener- ate results for our method, we use the same procedure as in Table 1,  pre-training a policy on the largest dataset (20 TPU blocks) and then  fine-tuning it on the same five unseen test blocks. SA is known to be a powerful, but slow, optimization method. However,  similar to RL, SA is capable of optimizing arbitrary non-differentiable  cost functions. T o show the relative sample efficiency of RL, we ran  experiments in which we replaced it with an SA optimizer. Our SA algo- rithm works as follows: in each SA iteration (step), we perform 2N macro  actions (where N is the number of macros). A macro action takes one of  three forms: swap, shift and mirror. Swap selects two macros at random  and swaps their locations, if feasible. Shift selects a macro at random and  shifts that macro to a neighbouring location (left, right, up or down).  Mirror flips a macro at random across the x axis, across the y axis, or  across both the x and y axes. We apply a uniform probability over the  three move types, meaning that at each time step there is a 1/3 chance  of swapping, a 1/3 chance of shifting and a 1/3 chance of flipping. After N  macro actions, we use an FD method to place clusters of standard cells  while keeping macro locations fixed, just as we do in our RL method.  For each macro action or FD action, the new state is accepted if it leads  to a lower cost. Otherwise, the new state is accepted with a probabil- ity of exp[prevcost – newcost)/t], where t = tmaxexp{−log[(tmax/tmin)(step/ steps)]}. Here prevcost refers to the cost at the previous iteration; newcost  refers to the cost at the current iteration; t is the temperature, which  controls the willingness of the algorithm to accept local degradations  in performance, allowing for exploration; and tmax and tmin correspond  to the maximum and minimum allowable temperature, respectively. T o make comparisons fair, we ran 80 SA experiments sweeping  different hyperparameters, including maximum temperature ({10−5,  3 × 10−5, 5 × 10−5, 7 × 10−5, 10−4, 2 × 10−4, 5 × 10−4, 10−3}), maximum SA episode  length ({5 × 104, 105}) and seed (five different random seeds), and report  the best results in terms of proxy wirelength and congestion costs in  Extended Data Table 6. Each of the 80 SA workers runs an experiment  corresponding to one particular choice of the five random seeds, two  episode lengths and eight maximum temperatures. The SA baseline uses more compute (80 SA workers × 2 CPUs per SA  worker × 18 h of runtime = 2,880 CPU-hours) than our method (16 RL  workers × (1 GPU + 10 CPUs per RL worker) × 6 h = 1,920 CPU-hours).  Here, we treat the cost of one GPU as roughly 10 times that of a CPU.  If we had stopped SA after 12 h (and if we did not use early stopping in  RL), then the two methods would have used equivalent compute, but  the SA results after 12 h were not even close to competitive. Even with  additional time (18 h of SA versus 6 h of RL), SA struggles to produce  high-quality placements compared to our approach, generating place- ments with 14.4% higher wirelength and 24.1% higher congestion on  average. Implications for a broader class of problems We believe that the proposed method has broader implications for  other stages of chip design and other placement optimization tasks.  For example, our zero-shot mode allows design space explorations  through rapid evaluation of computer architectures grounded in the  physical reality. Automating and optimizing architectural exploration  and its interface with physical design can not only further accelerate  the chip design process, but also lead to additional improvements in  critical hardware metrics, such as power and timing. Furthermore, this method is applicable to a broad class of placement  optimization problems outside of chip design, such as city planning (for  example, traffic light placement), compiler optimization (for example,  datacentre resource allocation) and environmental engineering (for  example, dam placement). Related work Chip floorplanning is a longstanding challenge, requiring multi-   objective optimization over circuits of ever-growing complexity. Since  the 1960s, many approaches have been proposed, so far falling into  three broad categories: (1) partitioning-based methods, (2) stochastic/ hill-climbing methods and (3) analytic solvers. Starting in the 1960s, industry and academic laboratories used  partitioning-based3,4,50 and resistive-network51,52 approaches to chip  floorplanning, as well as resistive-network based methods51,52. These  methods are characterized by a divide-and-conquer approach; the  netlist and the chip canvas are recursively partitioned until sufficiently  small sub-problems emerge, at which point the sub-netlists are placed  onto the sub-regions using optimal solvers. Such approaches are quite  fast to execute and their hierarchical nature allows them to scale to  arbitrarily large netlists. However, by optimizing each sub-problem  in isolation, partitioning-based methods sacrifice quality of the global  solution, especially routing congestion. Furthermore, a poor early  partition may result in an unsalvageable end placement. In the 1980s, analytic approaches emerged but were quickly over- taken by stochastic/hill-climbing algorithms, particularly SA6–8. SA is  named for its analogy to metallurgy, in which metals are first heated  and then gradually cooled to induce, or anneal, energy-optimal crystal- line surfaces. SA applies random perturbations to a given placement  (for example, shifts, swaps or mirroring of macros) and then measures  their effect on the objective function (for example, HPWL). If the per- turbation is an improvement, it is applied; if not, it is still applied with  some probability, referred to as temperature. T emperature is initialized  to a particular value and is then gradually annealed to a lower value.  Although SA generates high-quality solutions, it is very slow and dif- ficult to parallelize, thereby failing to scale to the increasingly large  and complex circuits of the 1990s and beyond. The 1990s–2000s were characterized by multi-level partitioning  methods5,53, as well as the resurgence of analytic techniques54, such as  FD methods9–11,25–27 and nonlinear optimizers55–58. The renewed suc- cess of quadratic methods was due in part to algorithmic advances  but also to the large size of modern circuits (10–100 million nodes),  which justified approximating the placement problem as that of placing  nodes with zero area. However, despite the computational efficiency  of quadratic methods, they are generally less reliable and produce  lower-quality solutions than their nonlinear counterparts. Nonlinear optimization approximates cost using smooth mathe- matical functions, such as the log-sum-exp59 and weighted-average60,61  models for wirelength, as well as Gaussian62 and Helmholtz models for  density. These functions are then combined into a single objective func- tion using a Lagrange penalty or relaxation. Owing to the higher com- plexity of these models, it is necessary to take a hierarchical approach,  placing clusters rather than individual nodes, an approximation that  degrades the quality of the placement. The last decade has seen the rise of modern analytic techniques,  including more advanced quadratic methods12,44,63–65, and more recently  electrostatics-based methods such as ePlace13 and RePlAce14. Model- ling netlist placement as an electrostatic system, ePlace13 proposed a  new formulation of the density penalty in which each node (macro or  standard cell) of the netlist is analogous to a positively charged particle  whose area corresponds to its electric charge. In this setting, nodes  repel each other with a force proportional to their charge (area), and  the density function and gradient correspond to the system’s potential  energy. Variations of this electrostatics-based approach have been  proposed to address standard cell placement13 and mixed-size place- ment60,66. RePlAce14 is a recent state-of-the-art mixed-size placement  technique that further optimizes ePlace’s density function by intro- ducing a local density function that tailors the penalty factor for each  individual bin size. DREAMPlace67 further speeds up RePlAce by tak- ing a deep-learning-based approach to optimize the placement and  leveraging GPU acceleration. However, the focus of DREAMPlace is  standard cell placement optimization, rather than macro placement,  and reports comparable quality to RePlAce. Therefore, we compare  the performance of our method against RePlAce. There are numerous opportunities for machine learning to advance  physical design68–70. Recent work71 proposes training a model to predict  the number of DRC violations for a given macro placement. DRCs are  rules that ensure that the placed and routed netlist adheres to tape-out  requirements. T o generate macro placements with fewer DRCs, ref. 71  uses the predictions from this trained model as the evaluation function  in simulated annealing. Although this work represents an interesting  direction, it reports results on netlists with no more than six macros,  far fewer than any modern block, and does not consider the effect of  place and route optimizations, which can dramatically alter the num- ber of DRCs. Furthermore, although adhering to the DRC criteria is a  necessary condition, the primary objective of macro placement is to  optimize for wirelength, timing (for example, WNS and TNS), power  and area, and this work does not even consider these metrics. T o address this classic problem, we propose a new category of  approach: an end-to-end learning-based method. This new approach  is most closely related to analytic solvers, particularly nonlinear ones,  in that all of these methods optimize an objective function via gradient  updates. However, our approach differs from prior approaches in its  ability to learn from past experience to generate higher-quality place- ments on new chips. Unlike existing methods that optimize the place- ment for each new chip from scratch, our work leverages knowledge  gained from placing prior chips to become better over time. In addition,  our method enables direct optimization of the target metrics, such as  wirelength, density and congestion, without having to define convex  approximations of those functions, as is done in other approaches13,14.  Not only does our formulation make it easy to incorporate new cost  functions as they become available, but it also allows us to weight their  relative importance according to the needs of a given chip block (for  example, timing-critical or power-constrained). Domain adaptation is the problem of training policies that can learn  across multiple experiences and transfer the acquired knowledge to  perform better on new unseen examples. In the context of chip floor- planning, domain adaptation involves training a policy across a set  of chip netlists and then applying that trained policy to a new unseen  Article netlist. The use of deep learning for combinatorial optimization is an  area of growing interest, including approaches to the Travelling Sales- man problem21,72, neural architecture search73 and model parallelism22,23.  More recently, there has been work on domain adaptation for compiler  optimization46,74–76 and the Maximum Cut problem77. Our approach  not only leverages past experience to reduce training time, but also  produces higher-quality results when exposed to more instances of the  problems. T o our knowledge, our method is the first deep RL approach  used in production to solve a combinatorial optimization problem,  namely, in the design of the latest generation of Google TPU. Data availability The data supporting the findings of this study are available within the  paper and the Extended Data. Code availability The code used to generate these data is available in the following GitHub  repository: https://github.com/google-research/circuit_training.   32. Karypis, G. & Kumar, V. Hmetis: a hypergraph partitioning package http://glaros.dtc.umn. edu/gkhome/metis/hmetis/overview (1998). 33. Alpert, C. J., Hagen, L. W. & Kahng, A. B. A hybrid multilevel/genetic approach for circuit  partitioning. In Proc. APCCAS’96 – Asia Pacific Conference on 1012 Circuits and Systems  298–301 (IEEE, 1996). 34. Caldwell, A. E., Kahng, A. B. & Markov, I. L. Improved algorithms for hypergraph 1014  bipartitioning. In Proc. 2000 Design Automation Conference 661–666 (IEEE, 2000). 35. Chen, H. et al. An algebraic multigrid solver for analytical placement with layout 1017  based clustering. In Proc. 40th annual Design Automation Conference 794–799 (ACM,  2003); 10.1145/775832.776034. 36. Alpert, C., Kahng, A., Nam, G.-J., Reda, S. & Villarrubia, P. A semi-persistent clustering  technique for vlsi circuit placement. In Proc. 2005 International Symposium on Physical  Design, 200–207 (ACM, 2005). 37. Fogaça, M., Kahng, A. B., Reis, R. & Wang, L. Finding placement-relevant clusters with fast  modularity-based clustering. In Proc. 24th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation  Conference 569–576 (ACM, 2019); https://doi.org/10.1145/3287624.3287676. 38. Fogaça, M. et al. On the superiority of modularity-based clustering for deter mining  placement-relevant clusters. Integration 74, 32–44 (2020). 39. Kahng, A. B. Futures for partitioning in physical design (tutorial). In Proc. 1998  International Symposium on Physical Design 190–193 (ACM, 1998); https://doi. org/10.1145/274535.274563. 40. Shahookar, K. & Mazumder, P. VLSI cell placement techniques. ACM Comput. Surv. 23,  143–220 (1991). 41. Caldwell, A. E., Kahng, A. B., Mantik, S., Markov, I. L. & Zelikovsky, A. On wirelength  estimations for row-based placement. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ.  Syst. 18, 1265–1278 (1999). 42. Kahng, A. B. & Xu, X. Accurate pseudo-constructive wirelength and congestion  estimation. In Proc. 2003 International Workshop on System-Level Interconnect Prediction  61–68 (ACM, 2003); https://doi.org/10.1145/639929.639942. 43. Kahng, A. B. & Reda, S. A tale of two nets: studies of wirelength progression in physical  design. In Proc. 2006 International Workshop on System-Level Interconnect Prediction  |17–24 (ACM, 2006); https://doi.org/10.1145/1117278.1117282. 44. Kim, M.-C., Viswanathan, N., Alpert, C. J., Markov, I. L. & Ramji, S. MAPLE: Multilevel  Adaptive Placement for Mixed-Size Designs. In Proc. 2012 ACM International Symposium  on International Symposium on Physical Design 193–200 (ACM, 2012). 45. Nazi, A., Hang, W., Goldie, A., Ravi, S. & Mirhoseini, A. GAP: generalizable approximate  graph partitioning framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations  Workshop (2019). 46. Zhou, Y. et al. GDP: generalized device placement for dataflow graphs. Preprint at https:// arxiv.org/abs/1910.01578 (2019). 47. Zhang, M. & Chen, Y. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. In Proc. International  Conference on Neural Information Processing 5171–5181 (Curran Associates Inc.,   2018). 48. Xie, Z. et al. RouteNet: routability prediction for mixed-size designs using convolutional  neural network. In 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design  (ICCAD) 1–8 (IEEE, 2018). 49. hMETIS – hypergraph and circuit partitioning manual http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/ metis/hmetis/download. 50. Dunlop, A. E. & Kernighan, B. W. A procedure for placement of standard-cell VLSI circuits.  IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 4, 92–98 (1985). 51. Cheng C. K. & Kuh. E. S. Module placement based on resistive network optimization. IEEE  Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 3, 218–225 (1984). 52. Tsay, R.-S., Kuh, E. & Hsu, C.-P. Proud: a fast sea-of-gates placement algorithm. In Proc.  Design Automation Conference 1988, 318–323 (IEEE, 1988). 53. Agnihotri, A., Ono, S. & Madden, P. Recursive bisection placement: Feng Shui 5.0  implementation details. In Proc. International Symposium on Physical Design 230–232  (ACM, 2005). 54. Alpert, C. et al. Analytical engines are unnecessary in top-down partitioning based  placement. VLSI Des. 10, 99–116 (2002). 55. Kahng, A. B., Reda, S. & Wang, Q. Architecture and details of a high quality, large-scale  analytical placer. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design 2005  891–898 (IEEE, 2005). 56. Kahng, A. B. & Wang, Q. An analytic placer for mixed-size placement and timing.driven  placement. In IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer Aided Design 2004   565–572 (IEEE, 2004). 57. Kahng, A. B. & Wang, Q. Implementation and extensibility of an analytic placer. IEEE  Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 24, 734–747 (2005). 58. Chen, T.-C., Jiang, Z.-W., Hsu, T.-C., Chen, H.-C. & Chang, Y.-W. A High-quality mixed-size  analytical placer considering preplaced blocks and density constraints. In Proc. 2006  IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design 187–192 (ACM, 2006). 59. Naylor, W., Donelly, R. & Sha, L. Non-linear optimization system and method for wire  length and delay optimization for an automatic electric circuit placer. US Patent  US6301693B1 (2001). 60. Lu, J., Zhuang, H., Kang, I., Chen, P. & Cheng, C.-K. Eplace-3d: electrostatics based  placement for 3d-ics. In International Symposium on Physical Design 11–18 (ACM, 2016). 61. Hsu, M.-K., Chang, Y.-W. & Balabanov, V. TSV-aware analytical placement for 3D IC  designs. In Proc. 48th Annual Design Automation Conference 664–669 (ACM, 2011). 62. Chen, T., Jiang, Z., Hsu, T., Chen, H. & Chang, Y. NTUplace3: an analytical placer for  large-scale mixed-size designs with preplaced blocks and density constraints. IEEE Trans.  Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 27, 1228–1240 (2008). 63. Kim, M.-C. & Markov, I. L. ComPLx: a competitive primal-dual Lagrange optimization for  global placement. In Design Automation Conference 2012 747– 755 (ACM, 2012). 64. Brenner, U., Struzyna, M. & Vygen, J. BonnPlace: placement of leading-edge chips by  advanced combinatorial algorithms. Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ.Cir. Sys. 27,   1607–1620 (2008). 65. Lin, T., Chu, C., Shinnerl, J. R., Bustany, I. & Nedelchev, I. POLAR: placement based on  novel rough legalization and refinement. In Proc. International Conference on  Computer-Aided Design 357–362 (IEEE, 2013). 66. Lu, J. et al. ePlace-MS: electrostatics-based placement for mixed-size circuits. IEEE Trans.  Comput. Aided Des. Integrated Circ. Syst. 34, 685–698 (2015). 67. Lin, Y. et al. DREAMPlace: deep learning toolkit-enabled GPU acceleration for modern  VLSI placement. In Design Automation Conference 1–6 (ACM/IEEE, 2019). 68. Kahng, A. B. Machine learning applications in physical design: recent results and  directions. In Proc. 2018 International Symposium on Physical Design 68–73 (ACM, 2018);  https://doi.org/10.1145/3177540.3177554. 69. Kahng, A. B. Reducing time and effort in ic implementation: a roadmap of challenges and  solutions. In Proc. 55th Annual Design Automation Conference (ACM, 2018); https://doi. org/10.1145/3195970.3199854. 70. Ajayi, T. et al. Toward an open-source digital flow: first learnings from the openroad  project. In Proc. 56th Annual Design Automation Conference 2019 (ACM, 2019); https:// doi.org/10.1145/3316781.3326334. 71. Huang, Y. et al. Routability-driven macro placement with embedded CNN-based  prediction model. In Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition   180–185 (IEEE, 2019). 72. Khalil, E., Dai, H., Zhang, Y., Dilkina, B. & Song, L. Learning combinatorial optimization  algorithms over graphs. Adv. Neural Inf. Process Syst. 30, 6348–6358 (2017). 73. Zoph, B. & Le, Q. V. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In Proc.  International Conference on Learning Representations (2017). 74. Addanki, R., Venkatakrishnan, S. B., Gupta, S., Mao, H. & Alizadeh, M. Learning  generalizable device placement algorithms for distributed machine learning. Adv. Neural  Inf. Process Syst. 32, 3981–3991 (2019). 75. Paliwal, A. et al. Reinforced genetic algorithm learning for optimizing computation  graphs. In Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations (2020). 76. Zhou, Y. et al. Transferable graph optimizers for ML compilers. Prepint at https://arxiv.org/ abs/2010.12438 (2021). 77. Barrett, T. D., Clements, W. R., Foerster, J. N. & Lvovsky, A. I. Exploratory combinatorial  optimization with reinforcement learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.04063  (2020). 78. Kipf, T. N. & Welling, M. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional  networks. Prepint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907 (2016). Acknowledgements This project was a collaboration between Google Brain and the Google  Chip Implementation and Infrastructure (CI2) Team. We thank M. Bellemare, C. Young, E. Chi,  C. Stratakos, S. Roy, A. Yazdanbakhsh, N. Myung-Chul Kim, S. Agarwal, B. Li, S. Bae, A. Babu,   M. Abadi, A. Salek, S. Bengio and D. Patterson for their help and support. Author contributions A.G. and A.M. are co-first authors and the order of the names was  determined by coin flip. M.Y., J.W.J., E.S., S.W. and Y.-J.L. were major contributors to this work.  The following authors contributed to the overall evaluation and provided insights on physical  design: E.J., O.P., A.N., J.P., A.T., K.S., W.H. and E.T. The following authors managed and advised  on the project: Q.V.L., J.L., R.H., R.C. and J.D. Competing interests The following US patents are related to this work: ‘Generating integrated  circuit floorplans using neural networks’ (granted as US10699043) and ‘Domain adaptive  reinforcement learning approach to macro placement’ (filed). Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03544-w. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.M. or A.G. Peer review information Nature thanks Jakob Foerster and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s)  for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints. Extended Data Fig. 1 | Evaluation workflow for producing the results in  Table 1. We allow each method access to the same clustered netlist  hypergraph. We use the same hyperparameters (to the extent possible) in all  the methods. Once the placement is completed by each method (this includes  the legalization step for RePlAce), we snap the macros to the power grids,  freeze the macro locations and use a commercial EDA tool to place the standard  cells and report the final results. Article Extended Data Fig. 2 | Zero-shot performance of Edge-GNN versus GCN  (graph convolutional neural network) 78. The agent with an Edge-GNN  architecture is more robust to over-fitting and yields higher-quality results, as  measured by average zero-shot performance on the test blocks shown in  Extended Data Fig. 1. Extended Data Fig. 3 | Generalization performance as a function of  pre-training dataset size.  We pre-train the policy network on three different  training datasets (the small dataset with 2 blocks is a subset of the medium   one with 5 blocks, and the medium dataset is a subset of the large one with   20 blocks). For each policy, at various snapshots during pre-training we report  its inference performance on an unseen test block. As the dataset size  increases, both the quality of generated placements on the test block and the  generalization performance of the policy improve. The policy trained on the  largest dataset is most robust to over-fitting. Article Extended Data Fig. 4 | Visualization of Ariane placements. Left, zero-shot  placements from the pre-trained policy; right, placements from the fine-tuned  policy. The zero-shot placements are generated at inference time on a  previously unseen chip. The pre-trained policy network (with no fine-tuning)  reserves a convex hull in the centre of the canvas in which standard cells can be  placed, a behaviour that reduces wirelength and that emerges only after many  hours of fine-tuning in the policy trained from scratch. Extended Data Fig. 5 | Visualization of a real TPU chip. Human expert  placements are shown on the left and results from our approach are shown on  the right. The white area represents macros and the green area represents  standard cells. The figures are intentionally blurred because the designs are  proprietary. The wirelength for the human expert design is 57.07 m, whereas  ours is 55.42 m. Furthermore, our method achieves these results in 6 h, whereas  the manual baseline took several weeks. Article Extended Data Table 1 | Hyperparameters used for fine-tuning the RL agent The pre-training hyperparameters are the same, except for the number of GPUs and the effective batch size. For pre-training, we use one GPU per  block in the training dataset (our largest dataset has 20 blocks). Extended Data Table 2 | Hyperparameters used for the FD algorithm that places standard cell clusters  Article Extended Data Table 3 | Hyperparameters used to generate standard cell clusters with hMETIS32  Extended Data Table 4 | Effect of different cost trade-offs on the post-PlaceOpt performance of Block 1 in Table 1 As expected, increasing congestion weight improves both horizontal and vertical congestion up to a point, but results in wirelength degradation, owing to the inherent trade-off between these  two metrics. Article Extended Data Table 5 | Sensitivity of results to the choice of random seed, as measured on a Ariane RISC-V block We observed little sensitivity to random seed in all of the three cost functions, although variations in wirelength and density are lower than congestion. The overall cost for these eight runs had  a standard deviation of 0.0022. Extended Data Table 6 | Performance of our method compared to SA Proxy wirelength and congestion for each block. We note that because these proxy metrics are relative, comparisons are only valid for different placements of the same block. Even with   additional time (18 h of SA versus 6 h of RL), SA generates placements with 14.4% higher wirelength and 24.1% higher congestion on average.