/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Wang, Y.; Kokubu, S.;
Huang, S.; Hsueh, Y.-H.; Yu, W.
Towards an Extensive Thumb Assist:
A Comparison between Whole-Finger
and Modular Types of Soft Pneumatic
Actuators. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app12083735
Academic Editor: Kristin Payrebrune
Received: 5 March 2022
Accepted: 4 April 2022
Published: 7 April 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Article
Towards an Extensive Thumb Assist: A Comparison between
Whole-Finger and Modular Types of Soft Pneumatic Actuators
Yuanyuan Wang 1
 , Shota Kokubu 1,*
 , Shaoying Huang 2
 , Ya-Hsin Hsueh 3 and Wenwei Yu 1,4, *
1 Department of Medical Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Chiba University, 1-33, Yayoicho,
Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan; wangyuanyuan@chiba-u.jp
2 Engineering Product Development, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Road,
Singapore 487372, Singapore; huangshaoying@sutd.edu.sg
3 Department of Electronic Engineering, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology,
123 University Road, Section 3, Douliou, Yunlin City 64002, Taiwan; hsuehyh@yuntech.edu.tw
4 Center for Frontier Medical Engineering, Chiba University, Inage-Ku, Yayoi-Cho 1-33, Chiba 263-8522, Japan
* Correspondence: s.kokubu@chiba-u.jp (S.K.); yuwill@faculty.chiba-u.jp (W.Y.); Tel.: +81-43-290-3231 (W.Y.)
Abstract: Soft pneumatic actuators used in robotic rehabilitation gloves are classiﬁed into two types:
whole-ﬁnger actuators with air chambers that cover the entire ﬁnger and modular actuators with
chambers only above the ﬁnger joints. Most existing prototypes provide enough ﬁnger ﬂexion
support, but insufﬁcient independent thumb abduction or opposition support. Even the latest
modular soft actuator realized thumb abduction with a sacriﬁce of range of motion (RoM). Moreover,
the advantages and disadvantages of using the two types of soft actuators for thumb assistance
have not been made clear. Without an efﬁcient thumb assist, patients’ options for hand function
rehabilitation are very limited. Therefore, the objective of this study was to design a modular actuator
(M-ACT) that could support multiple degrees of freedom, compare it with a whole-ﬁnger type of
thumb actuator with three inner chambers (3C-ACT) in terms of the RoM, force output of thumb
ﬂexion, and abduction, and use an enhanced Kapandji test to measure both the kinematic aspect of
the thumb (Kapandji score) and thumb-tip pinch force. Our results indicated superior single-DoF
support capability of the M-ACT and superior multi-DoF support capability of the 3C-ACT. The use
of the 3C-ACT as the thumb actuator and the M-ACT as the four-ﬁnger actuator may be the optimal
solution for the soft robotic glove. This study will aid in the progression of soft robotic gloves for
hand rehabilitation towards real rehabilitation practice.
Keywords: soft pneumatic actuator; modular type; whole-ﬁnger type; reinforcement ﬁber; thumb
assist; Kapandji test; abduction; ﬂexion; thumb opposition
1. Introduction
Patients who have had a cerebrovascular accident (stroke) commonly have a degree of
hand impairments, which can manifest as muscle weakness, joint stiffness, or a deﬁcit in
motor planning and motor learning [1]. According to an Australian government guide [2],
a complete loss of hand results in a 54% whole-person impairment (WPI), and a loss of
one ﬁnger results in at least a 5% WPI. Rehabilitation for the entire hand and for each
ﬁnger digit following a stroke is critical for motor control recovery and an enhanced quality
of life.
Robotic gloves that assist the hand in performing repetitive rehabilitation movements
have been testiﬁed to be effective in promoting the rehabilitation process [3–5]. Soft robotic
gloves driven by pneumatic actuators made of silicon rubber have attracted the interest of
researchers in recent years due to their higher compliance to the wearer and environment
compared to motor-driven rigid robotic gloves [6–9].
Soft pneumatic actuators of soft robotic gloves can be categorized into two types in
terms of construction: whole-ﬁnger type and modular/segmented type.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12083735 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 2 of 18
The whole-ﬁnger type has pneumatic chambers or pockets that run from the tip to the
root, covering all the ﬁnger joints and segments. When the chambers are pressurized, all the
joints ﬂex at the same time. For example, Connolly et al. [ 10] and Polygerinos et al. [11,12]
developed ﬁber-reinforced actuators with a single-chamber main body that extends from
the ﬁngertip to the middle of the metacarpal bones. The reinforcement ﬁbers are coiled
outside the body in various patterns, causing the actuator to bend, twist, and stretch upon
air inﬂation. Other classical soft actuators, the Pneu-net actuators designed by Yap [ 13],
Polygerinos et al. [14], and Gu et al. [15], consist of a strain-limited bottom layer and an
elastomer body embedded with multiple chambers connected in series. The angle of these
chambers is carefully adjusted to achieve the actuator’s bending, twisting, and coupled
deformations. These Pneu-net and ﬁber-reinforced soft actuators can impel a ﬁnger to
perform ﬂexion motions. However, they lack ergonomics and may impose a burden on the
ﬁnger since they are deformed into a curve that deviates from the ﬁnger outline, resulting
in a high binding force at the phalanges (forces restrict the actuator to bulge) [16].
The Modular/segmented type, however, has chambers only above the ﬁnger joints,
aiming to provide bending force at ﬁnger joints instead of the phalanges. Wang et al. [16],
Yap et al. [17], and Li et al. [18] shortened the air chamber of the Pneu-net actuatorin [13,14]
and connected chambers with solid silicon or inﬂexible components. Similarly, the ﬁber-
reinforced actuators designed by Shiota et al. [19] and Heung et al. [20,21] have chamber
segments on the distal interphalangeal joint, proximal interphalangeal joint, and metacar-
pophalangeal (MCP) joint, respectively. The bellow-shaped actuator, another type of soft
actuator popular in the past ﬁve years, is usually utilized in a modular fashion in a robotic
glove. The even change of the bellow’s peripheric zigzag angle results in longitudinal
extension, whereas the uneven peripheral change results in radius bending. For example,
Guo et al. [ 22] and Hu et al. [ 23] developed robotic gloves with three bellow modules
on each of the four-ﬁnger digits and two modules on the thumb for ﬁnger ﬂexion and
extension. These actuator modules or segments can connect to separate air inlets, allowing
them to control the independent bending of each joint.
In general, the above-mentioned whole-ﬁnger and modular actuators can provide ade-
quate support for achieving a full range of motion (RoM) of ﬁnger ﬂexion (1.2–3.6 Nﬂexion
force). Nevertheless, they are insufﬁcient in thumb abduction and opposition support, and
the two types of actuators have deﬁcits in different aspects of thumb motion support.
The restoration of thumb function is essential for a high quality of life and return
to work. It is estimated that the absence of the thumb will cause a 40% loss of hand
function [24] and result in a 23% WPI [ 2]. Therefore, a functional hand rehabilitation or
assistive robotic glove must be able to provide enough support for thumb motions.
Unlike the other four-ﬁnger digits, the thumb has a large RoM requirement in both
ﬂexions (88 ◦ of interphalangeal (IP) joint; 60 ◦ of MCP joint [ 25]) and palmar abduction
(49.4◦ [26]). The thumb abduction RoM determines the largest object a hand can hold.
Moreover, the primary contributor for effective handling and manipulation of small objects
is thumb opposition, which involves ﬂexion, abduction, and rotation at the carpometacarpal
(CMC) joint. The rotation of the CMC joint can be omitted in a robotic glove, since it
is not a voluntary movement [ 24]. Accordingly, soft thumb actuators must be capable
of supporting at least independent ﬂexion, independent abduction, and opposition (a
combination of ﬂexion and abduction). Without an effective thumb assist, it is difﬁcult to
apply soft-pneumatic actuators to hand rehabilitation exercises despite their advantages
over motor-driven robotic devices.
The whole-ﬁnger type in [10] (ﬁber-reinforced), [12] (ﬁber-reinforced), and [13] (Pneu-
net) have a speciﬁc unit for the thumb. These studies simpliﬁed thumb opposition as a
coupled movement of ﬂexion and twisting. As a result, the root part of the Pneu-net actuator
was designed with oblique chamber networks, and the root part of the ﬁber-reinforced
actuator (or the entire actuator [12]) was coiled with ﬁber in a single-helix pattern. These
actuators can make the thumb contacts the ﬁngertip of the small ﬁnger, but they lack
independent support in the thumb abduction direction.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 3 of 18
In [16] (Pneu-net), [18] (Pneu-net), and [23] (bellow-shaped), which designed modu-
lar/segmented type of actuators, the thumb opposition was simpliﬁed as a combination
of ﬂexion and abduction. The authors placed a mini version of their actuator transversely
between the thumb and index ﬁnger’s MCP joint to compel the thumb to abduct. These
actuators can assist a hand to grip a large object; however, the initial length of the extra
module prevents the thumb from reaching the lateral side of the index ﬁnger, restricting
the thumb’s abduction RoM.
We previously developed a whole-ﬁnger thumb actuator [27] and a modular ﬁnger
actuator (M-ACT) [28], both of which are ﬁber-reinforced soft actuators. The whole-ﬁnger
thumb actuator has three tapering inner chambers designed to compensate for the hand’s
space limitation and reduce interference between adjacent chambers. The air inﬂation of
the middle chamber supports thumb ﬂexion, the two side chambers support abduction and
adduction, respectively, and the simultaneous pressurization of the middle and left-side
chambers supports thumb opposition. This three-chamber actuator (3C-ACT) can assist the
ﬁngertip of the thumb in touching nearly all the positions recommended in the Kapandji
test [29], which is used to access the thumb’s opposition. However, it showed chamber
interference manifested as undesired ﬂexion during left-side chamber pressurization. The
M-ACT was not speciﬁcally designed for the thumb, but we can arrange multiple modules
while taking space constraint and inter-chamber interference into account to achieve sup-
port in different degrees of freedom (DoFs) of the thumb’s CMC joint, e.g., by attaching two
modules vertically side by side. Air inﬂation of one of the modules would produce thumb
abduction or adduction, and their simultaneous air inﬂation could cause joint ﬂexion.
There have been few studies that developed effective soft thumb actuators; moreover,
the advantages and disadvantages of whole-ﬁnger types and modular types in thumb
motion assist (multi-DoF assist) remain unclear. Although several of the studies mentioned
above accessed their thumb actuators or modules, the data cannot be directly compared
because the actuators were designed, manufactured, and measured based on different
schemes. The comparison of the two thumb actuator types would surely provide insights
into soft-actuator-based thumb motion support and improvement of the function of soft
robotic gloves.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to: (1) design and evaluate the modular type of ﬁber-
reinforced thumb actuator; (2) compare thumb assist performances of the whole-ﬁnger type
and the designed modular type actuators. Thumb assist performances were assessed in
terms of RoM and force output of thumb ﬂexion and abduction, and an enhanced Kapandji
test measured both the kinematic aspect of the thumb (Kapandji score) and thumb-tip
pinch force.
This paper is organized as follows: the Methods section introduces the manufacture of
the three-chamber and modular thumb actuators. The Section 4 presents the ﬂexion and
abduction RoM and force output, the Kapandji score, and the thumb–ﬁnger pinch force of
all the proposed actuators. The Section 5 offers interpretations of the data, the contributions
and limitations of this study, and future directions, followed by the Section 7.
2. Actuator Structure and Fabrication
2.1. RoM Requirements of Actuators
The RoM requirement was determined based on a healthy adult’s left hand rather than
referencing the average data from previous studies, as RoM data of the thumb, particularly
for the abduction RoM of the CMC joint, vary widely due to the different initial thumb
positions, movement types (active or passive), and the use of different measurement tools
(e.g., goniometer or Pollexograph) [30].
The active thumb RoM of the participant was assessed using two methods: one with a
goniometer and the other with a camera-based three-dimensional marker detection system
(OpenCV with python). The actuator RoM requirements were set to the same value as that
measured using OpenCV , since the value of OpenCV was similar to that measured with a
goniometer (Table 1), and the actuator RoM would be evaluated using the same system.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 4 of 18
Table 1. RoM requirements of the thumb and actuators.
Thumb Motion
Real Thumb RoM [◦] Actuator RoM
Requirement [◦]Goniometer Value OpenCV Value
IP joint ﬂexion 90 89 89
MCP joint ﬂexion 37 32 32
CMC joint ﬂexion 15 13 13
CMC joint abduction 43 38 38
RoM: range of motion; IP: interphalangeal; MCP: metacarpophalangeal; CMC: carpometacarpal.
Finger extension was not considered in this study, as the extension is frequently
exercised separately.
2.2. Consideration of Actuator Design Parameters
The 3C-ACT and M-ACT were designed in similar schemes. Speciﬁcally, the chamber
thickness of both actuators was set as 2 mm. The height and width of the 3C-ACT were
1 mm larger than that of the M-ACT, due to its more complicated inner structure (Figure 1).
The M-ACT had a ﬁber loop interval of 2 mm, which was 0.5 mm greater than the 3C-ACT,
since ﬁber wrapping that is too dense signiﬁcantly hinders its bending capability [28].
Figure 1. Actuator structures.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 5 of 18
2.2.1. Whole-Finger Thumb Actuator: Three-Chamber Actuator
The 3C-ACT has the same geometrical structure and dimensions as the semicylindrical
three-chamber actuator presented in [ 27] (Figure 1a). The middle chamber for thumb
ﬂexion was tapering up, with the maximum cross section area at the tip and the minimum
at the root, matching the maximum ﬂexion RoM requirement at the IP joint and the
minimum at the CMC joint. The two side-chambers for abduction–adduction were in a
contrary structure (tapering down) because thumb abduction only occurs at the CMC joint.
Reinforcement ﬁber was coiled in two patterns: 21 loops of two-way hitching at the tip to
facilitate deformation in ﬂexion direction and 13 sets of double-helix at rest for permitting
both abduction and ﬂexion.
2.2.2. Modular Thumb Actuator
The actuator module was 23 mm long, which is long enough to ﬁt into any of the
thumb joints (Figure 1b). The ﬁber was wrapped in 12 loops of two-way hitching [ 28].
Two modules were connected head-to-tail, one for each of the IP joints and MCP joints, for
impelling joint ﬂexion. The bottom surface of the ﬂexion module was made of stiffer silicon
than the rest to limit the extension of the bottom surface, hence facilitating the module
to ﬂex.
The actuator unit for the CMC joint was designed based on the concept of utilizing pre-
existing ﬂexion modules to realize multi-DoF support without a noticeable sacriﬁce of ROM
of abduction. According to the previous studies [ 16,18,23] that used a modular actuator
for thumb abduction assistance, the modular unit cannot be simply placed transversely
between the metacarpal bones of the thumb and the index ﬁnger because its initial length
would diminish the thumb abduction RoM. Therefore, we designed a CMC unit attaching
the bottom surfaces of two modules via an inextensible nylon thread (1.2 mm diameter)
that ran longitudinally between them. The left module is responsible for CMC abduction,
and the simultaneous air inﬂation of both modules induces CMC ﬂexion. It is noteworthy
that the two bottom surfaces cannot be completely attached because the two-module
unit would have to overcome the elasticity of a shore 20A silicone (the stiffness of the
silicone used in this study) block with a width of 4 mm (two times the chamber thickness)
and a thickness of 15 mm (the width of the module), causing the unit to barely ﬂex
during simultaneous inﬂation of the two modules. Moreover, the CMC unit was wrapped
with 12 loops of the single loop instead of two-way hitching because ﬁbers in two-way
hitching would restrict the elongation of the actuator surface that makes contact with the
thumb, resulting in unwanted ﬂexion during the air inﬂation of the left module (abduction).
Accordingly, the optimization of the position of the inter-module thread would be important
for effective multi-DoF support. We made two versions of the CMC actuator unit: one with
the connective thread positioned at the center axis of the bottom surfaces (version 1), and
the other with the thread located at a deeper position nearer to the thumb that equals the
3/4 of the module’s width (version 2).
2.3. Actuator Manufacture
Actuators were cast using PLA molds that were constructed with CAD software (Auto
inventor) and printed with a 3D printer (Ultimaker 2 Extended+, Ultimaker B.V ., Utrecht,
The Netherlands). Smooth-Sil 940 (SmoothOn, Inc., Macungie, PA, USA) was used to
make the bottom surface of the ﬂexion module of the M-ACT. The rest of the M-ACT, as
well as the entire actuator unit of 3C-ACT, was fabricated using DragonSkin 20. Ecoﬂex
00-30 was used for the ﬁnal coating after ﬁber wrapping. The reinforcement ﬁber was
0.7-mm-diameter cotton thread. The connector between modules and the root connector
for ﬁxing the actuators were printed by the 3D printer.
3. Evaluations
For the purpose of practical evaluation, all the measurements were carried out with
the designed actuator mounted on a dummy thumb/hand (Figure 2a) that mimicked the

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 6 of 18
biomechanics of the participant’s hand. The air pressure of the 3C-ACT and the ﬂexion
module of the M-ACT were increased in 30 kPa increments, and the CMC unit of the
M-ACT was increased in 15 kPa increments (corresponding to a smaller RoM requirement
of the CMC joint than the other joints) until they reached their limit, at which point the
actuator deformed extremely. Each measurement was repeated at least three times, and the
mean value was evaluated.
Figure 2. Measurement setups.
3.1. RoM Measurement
Fiver markers were attached to the dummy thumb at the root, ﬁngertip, and three
thumb joints, respectively (Figure 2a). A camera-based angle calculator constructed with
OpenCV was used to calculate the joint angle. The three-dimensional coordinates of the
markers were recorded with a depth camera (RealSense TM Depth Camera D435, Intel ®,
Santa Clara, CA, USA), and the joint angle was determined using the angle enclosed by
three markers. The ﬂexion RoM was calculated from the x-axis and y-axis data, while the
abduction RoM was calculated from the y-axis and z-axis data.
3.2. Force Output Measurement
Force generated at each thumb segment (distal phalanx (DP), proximal phalanx (PP),
and metacarpal) was measured using a three-axis load cell (USL06-H5 Load cell, max:
100N, Tec Gihan, Kyoto, Japan) (Figure 2b).
The ﬁnger segment to be measured was wired to the load cell during the measurement,
permitting the rest of the ﬁnger to move freely. The ﬂexion force was calculated as the net
force of F_Y (elongation force) and F_Z (ﬂexion force).
The overall abduction force of the 3C-ACT was measured at the middle of the DP
segment because the side chamber for abduction extends from the root to the ﬁngertip.
The abduction force of the M-ACT was measured at the middle of the PP segment. The

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 7 of 18
abduction force was F_Z, and the ﬂexion force during an abduction was the net force of
F_X (ﬂexion force) and F_Y (elongation force).
3.3. The Measurement of the Enhanced Kapndji T est
The Kapandji test has a score range of 0 to 10, indicating where a thumb could
touch [29] (Figure 2c). The scores of 9 and 10 were omitted because these movements are
rarely used in daily life.
The Kapandji test was performed with various combinations of actuators:
1. A 3C-ACT for thumb assistance and a conventional single-chamber actuator for
four-ﬁnger assistance.
2. An M-ACT for thumb assistance and a single-chamber actuator for four-finger assistance.
3. A 3C-ACT for thumb assistance and an M-ACT with three ﬂexion modules connected
in series for four-ﬁnger assistance.
Moreover, the clinical Kapandji test only focuses on whether the thumb tip can contact
the ten scoring points, though there are multiple thumb–ﬁnger postures for achieving the
thumb–ﬁnger opposition. Figure 2d shows three different thumb–small ﬁnger postures
for scoring point 6 shown in Figure 2c. Therefore, for the most critical thumb–small ﬁnger
opposition, we measured three postures illustrated in Figure 2d, which require different
degrees of thumb ﬂexion and abduction.
The air pressure in the thumb actuator and the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator were
carefully tuned to make the thumb reach the target positions speciﬁed by the Kapandji
test. We inserted the three-axis load cell between ﬁngers after conﬁrming thumb-to-ﬁnger
contact to record the change in pinch force with the pressurization of the thumb actuator
and the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator (Figure 2e). The pinch force was evaluated as the net
force of F_X, F_Y, and F_Z.
Thumb opposition failure was deﬁned as the inability of the thumb to reach the target
position after a sequence of air pressure adjustments.
4. Results
All the RoM and force output results were presented with mean ± SD.
4.1. RoM Results
4.1.1. Flexion RoM
The three thumb joints were ﬂexed to their required angles when using the 3C-ACT
and M-ACTs (Figure 3). The two M-ACTs bent the joints to the requirement at a lower air
pressure compared with the 3C-ACT.
Figure 3. Flexion RoM. CMC: carpometacarpal; MCP: metacarpophalangeal; IP: interphalangeal.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 8 of 18
For the comparison between the two modular actuators, version 2, with a close-to-
thumb bending axis, had a slightly larger ﬂexion angle at each joint than version 1, with
a bending axis in the center (CMC, MCP , and IP joints were ﬂexed to 8.8 ◦, 29.7 ◦, and
84.1◦, respectively when using version 1, and ﬂexed to 17.5 ◦, 32.3◦, and 88.1◦ when using
version 2).
4.1.2. Abduction RoM
All three thumb actuators rotated the metacarpal of the dummy thumb to the required
angle (32◦) in the palmar direction (Figure 4a). The thumb ﬂexed during an abduction,
particularly for the 3C-ACT (Figure 4b–d). It made all the thumb joints ﬂex to a notably
larger angle than M-ACTs.
Figure 4. The thumb abduction and ﬂexion RoM during left-side chamber/module air inﬂation.
CMC: carpometacarpal; MCP: metacarpophalangeal; IP: interphalangeal.
Only the CMC actuator unit of the M-ACTs was inﬂated during the abduction. As
a result, the CMC joint was ﬂexed the most, followed by the MCP , while the IP joint was
barely ﬂexed at all. The M-ACT version 2 generally had a slightly larger ﬂexion angle
during abduction than version 1 (Figure 4b).

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 9 of 18
4.2. Force Output Results
4.2.1. Flexion Force
The M-ACTs had a larger maximal ﬂexion force at the metacarpal bone than the
3C-ACT; however, they had a lesser maximal force at the DP segment than the 3C-ACT
(Figure 5a,c).
Figure 5. Flexion force output. PP: proximal phalanx; DP: distal phalanx.
The two versions of the M-ACT exerted similar intensities of maximum ﬂexion force
at all three thumb segments (version 1: 3.69 N of ﬂexion force at the metacarpal, 4.96 N at
PP , and 4.85 N at DP; version 2: 3.97 N at the metacarpal, 5.16 N at PP , and 4.62 N at DP)
(Figure 5).
The 3C-ACT exhibited the greatest ﬂexion force output at the DP , followed by the PP ,
and the lowest force output at the metacarpal, which is consistent with its design purpose.
4.2.2. Abduction Torque/Force
The M-ACT and 3C-ACT both had similar maximum torque for thumb abduction
(Figure 6a). The abduction torque of the two versions of the M-ACT did not differ signiﬁ-
cantly, showing that the two versions had a similar abduction force. Combining the results
of ﬂexion force output, both versions had similar force output capability.
Figure 6. Abduction torque and ﬂexion force output during left-side chamber/module air inﬂation.
Similar to the abduction RoM results (Figure 4b–d), the 3C-ACT showed the highest
ﬂexion force during thumb abduction, followed by M-ACT version 2; M-ACT version 1
had the lowest (Figure 6b).

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 10 of 18
4.3. The Enhanced Kapandji T est Results
4.3.1. Kapandji Score
When using the same single-chamber actuator for four-ﬁnger ﬂexion, the 3C-ACT was
able to make the thumb’s ﬁngertip touch the 0–8 positions in the Kapandji test (Figure 7a),
whereas the M-ACT was unable to realize positions six and seven, which require the
most thumb ﬂexion and a relatively larger abduction to make contact with (Figure 7b).
Figure A1A (lower) illustrates an example of thumb opposition failure. When using the
3C-ACT as the thumb actuator and the M-ACT as the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator, the
thumb achieved a Kapandji score of 0–8 (Figure 7c).
Figure 7. Kapandji test results of three actuator combinations.
4.3.2. Thumb–Small Opposition
The 3C-ACT was successful in all three types of thumb–small opposition (Figure 8a).
Both side chambers responsible for abduction and adduction were inﬂated to facilitate
CMC joint ﬂexion during type 1 and type 2 thumb–small oppositions.
However, the M-ACT was unable to accomplish types 2 and 3 of thumb–small opposi-
tion (Figure 8b) because both ﬂexion and abduction were required for the CMC joint. It
was challenging to adjust the air pressure of the two actuator modules in the CMC unit to
get a stable actuator deformation for achieving multi-DoF thumb opposition. Only type 1
of the thumb–small opposition requires the ﬂexion of all three joints; as a result, both of the
modules in the CMC unit were inﬂated for the ﬂexion of the CMC joint.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 11 of 18
Figure 8. Three types of thumb–small opposition.
4.3.3. Thumb-Tip Pinch Force
The thumb and four ﬁngers may form different arcs of closure at each thumb-tip
opposition. In addition, the load cell placement (i.e., angle, contact position) varies from
time to time, which affects the pinch force values. For a general assessment, the pinch
force was calculated as the average of three times of measurements, and the value at the
maximum air inﬂation was evaluated.
In general, the thumb generated greater pinch forces with the index and middle ﬁngers
than with the ring and little ﬁngers, the ﬁngers furthest away from the thumb (Table 2).
Table 2. The pinch force of the 3-chamber actuator and modular actuator (N).
Actuator Combination Thumb–Index Thumb–Middle Thumb–Ring Thumb–Small
3C-ACT (thumb) + single-chamber ACT (4-ﬁnger) 5.7 4.1 3.7 4
M-ACT (thumb) + single-chamber ACT (4-ﬁnger) 5.8 4.3 3.2 -
3C-ACT (thumb) + M-ACT (4-ﬁnger) 6.2 5.0 3.5 3.3
3C-ACT: 3-chamber actuator; M-ACT: modular type actuator.
When the identical single-chamber actuator was used for four-ﬁnger ﬂexion, the
thumb actuators of the M-ACT and 3C-ACT generated similar levels of pinch force with
the three ﬁngers, except for the small ﬁnger. The combination of the 3C-ACT and M-ACT
produced a greater pinch force than the other two actuator combinations, particularly for
the thumb and two ﬁngers next to it (index and middle ﬁngers).
5. Discussion
In this section, we evaluated the two M-ACT versions and determined which one
works better in terms of thumb ﬂexion and abduction assistance. The M-ACT was then
compared with the 3C-ACT in terms of ﬂexion, abduction, and opposition assistance.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 12 of 18
5.1. Comparison between the Two Versions of Modular Thumb Actuator
The two versions of the CMC unit of the M-ACT have a similar actuator struc-
ture, only differing in the position of the ﬁber axis (bending axis) for restricting the
longitudinal elongation.
In line with the design purpose, version 2, with an off-center bending axis, showed a
greater ﬂexion RoM than version 1 (Figure 3). Nevertheless, it did not exhibit a signiﬁcant
advantage in ﬂexion force output, even at the metacarpal bone (corresponding to the CMC
joint, Figure 5). The force was measured by inﬂating all actuator modules simultaneously,
including two ﬂexion modules and the CMC unit. Therefore, the measured force was
the two actuator modules’ combined force before and after the measurement position. In
contrast to the ﬂexion module for the IP joint, which had both ends ﬁxed, the connection
part of the CMC unit and MCP ﬂexion module was nearly impossible to ﬁx on the hand’s
dorsal side (Figure 9). As a result, during large air inﬂation, the root of the MCP ﬂexion
module would elevate the head of the CMC unit, thus reducing the ﬂexion effect of the
CMC unit.
Figure 9. The deformation of a modular thumb actuator during excessive air inﬂation.
Additionally, the two versions of the M-ACT differed solely in the CMC unit, but
the result showed that version 2 had a slightly greater ﬂexion RoM in the CMC joint (the
root section) and the IP joint (the tip section). Since the surface of a ﬁnger extends with
ﬁnger ﬂexion, mostly as the extension of the knuckle creases, the actuator modules need to
move or elongate to maintain an efﬁcient bending torque. Version 2 ﬂexed more intensely
than version 1 (Figure 3), indicating a greater elongation of the top surface of version 2.
The lengthened top part may push the two ﬂexion modules toward the ﬁngertip to some
extent. Consequently, the mutual effects between adjacent modules may affect the bending
performance of the whole actuator.
In terms of thumb abduction support, both versions of the M-ACT could impel
the thumb to abduct to a similar angle (Figure 4a) and give comparable magnitudes of
abduction torque (Figure 6a). However, due to its off-center bending axis, version 2 had a
larger RoM (Figure 4b–d) and force output (Figure 6b) in the ﬂexion direction during the
air inﬂation of the left module of the CMC unit (abduction).
In general, though version 2 had an undesirable ﬂexion during thumb abduction, it
outperformed version 1 in thumb ﬂexion support and may be helpful for the ﬂexion of
other joints (i.e., IP joint). Accordingly, the M-ACT version 2 was selected for the following
comparison with the 3C-ACT.
5.2. Comparison between the Modular Actuator and the Three-Chamber Actuator
5.2.1. Single-DoF Support Performance
Both the 3C-ACT and M-ACT were capable of bending the thumb joints to their limited
angles (Figures 3 and 4a). The 3C-ACT could generate a maximum ﬂexion force of 6.0 N at

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 13 of 18
the DP segment (Figure 5c), and the M-ACT could generate a maximum force of5.2 N at the
PP segment (Figure 5b). There has seldom been a study that assessed the force of intrinsic
hand muscles required for passive ﬁnger ﬂexion. As a reference, the extrinsic muscle
group tendon force generated during passive ﬁnger motions could be up to 8.8 N [31]. The
overall force output of the two actuators on the whole thumb would be intense enough to
impel a passive thumb motion, thus demonstrating their capability in supporting thumb
ﬂexion motions.
As for the difference between the two thumb actuator types, the 3C-ACT had a lower
ﬂexion force at the metacarpal bone than the M-ACT (Figure 5a) because the middle
chamber of the 3C-ACT has the smallest cross section area at the root part, resulting in a
much smaller effective area (which directly affects the bending angle of an actuator), than
the M-ACT. The maximum cross section of the 3C-ACT’s middle chamber (at the ﬁngertip)
was still smaller than that of the M-ACT (Figure 1), but it produced a larger force output
at the DP segment than the M-ACT (Figure 5c). The ﬂexion force was calculated as the
combined force of elongation and ﬂexion forces. Due to its double-helix ﬁber wrapping
method, the 3C-ACT may have a greater elongation force than the M-ACT. Such actuator
elongation would also be helpful for improving the ﬂexion angle of all three joints.
Moreover, compared with the M-ACT, the 3C-ACT had a signiﬁcantly larger undesired
ﬂexion RoM (Figure 4b–d) and force output (Figure 6b) during thumb abduction. Unlike the
CMC unit of the M-ACT, which has more than two symmetry axes in structure (symmetric
in both top–bottom and left–right, Figure 1b), the 3C-ACT is only symmetric in left–right
(Figure 1a). During left chamber pressurization, the curved top surface of the 3C-ACT
would expand more vigorously than the bottom surface, resulting in deformation in the
ﬂexion direction. Accordingly, the M-ACT’s CMC unit with two modules (or chambers)
may be more structurally beneﬁcial to independent ﬂexion and abduction support than the
actuator with three chambers.
In general, the two types of thumb actuators have equivalent thumb ﬂexion assist
capabilities. Structurally, both have the potential to provide sufﬁcient support in thumb
ﬂexion and abduction with less sacriﬁce in RoM when compared with the soft ﬁnger
actuators designed in previous studies [10,12,18,23]. However, the M-ACT would be more
suitable for independent ﬂexion and abduction assistance due to less undesired ﬂexion
during an abduction.
5.2.2. Multi-DoF Support Performance
When using the identical single-chamber actuator to assist the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion,
the 3C-ACT achieved all the Kapandji scores (0–8, Figure 7a); however, the M-ACT was
unable to make the thumb come in contact with the small ﬁnger (a Kapandji score of 0–5
and 8, Figure 7b). The result of the Kapandji test is affected by two factors: ﬁrst, during
the measurement of the two actuators, the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator may ﬂex the four-
ﬁnger to different angles, and second, the M-ACT may be inferior in thumb opposition
support. Table A1 shows that when using the M-ACT and 3C-ACT to perform thumb–ﬁnger
opposition motions, the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator was inﬂated to similar air pressure
ranges. Accordingly, the two actuators had to ﬂex and abduct the thumb to similar angles
during the Kapandji test. Therefore, the latter would be the reason for the lower Kapandji
score of the M-ACT.
Unlike the air chambers in the 3C-ACT, which are in charge of the actuator bending in
identical directions (the middle chamber for ﬂexion, the left side-chamber for abduction,
and the right side-chamber for adduction), each chamber of the M-ACT’s CMC unit is
responsible for the bending in two directions (the left module is responsible for ﬂexion and
abduction, and the right module for ﬂexion and adduction).
There would be two strategies for manually inﬂating the M-ACT for realizing thumb
opposition movements. One strategy is to inﬂate the left module ﬁrst to abduct the thumb
ﬁngertip to the same height as the four-ﬁngertip, then inﬂate the right module to ﬂex the
CMC joint (Figure A1A). The pressurization of the right module did not ﬂex the CMC

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 14 of 18
joint on the basis of a certain degree of abduction; instead, it sacriﬁced the abduction for
ﬂexion. The air pressure in the two modules must be adjusted repeatedly until the thumb’s
ﬁngertip reaches the objective position, which is a difﬁcult procedure to complete manually,
as even a minor alteration at the CMC joint would deviate the ﬁngertip (distal part) from
the objective position. The other strategy is to ﬁrst inﬂate the two modules for CMC ﬂexion
and then increase the air pressure in the left module for thumb abduction (Figure A1B).
Either strategy is difﬁcult to achieve a steady and ﬂuent thumb–small opposition support,
especially for postures that require both large thumb ﬂexion and abduction because the
deformation of the CMC unit in different DoF is not independent. The 3C-ACT, however, is
simpler to manipulate. We could adopt either of the above-mentioned strategies to achieve
thumb opposition with a less air tuning procedure because its deformation in different
DoF is independent (additive), but not mutually depleting. Accordingly, the three-chamber
structure of the 3C-ACT may be more beneﬁcial to thumb opposition (multi-DoF) support.
For the same reason, the 3C-ACT can realize all three types of thumb–small positions
(Figure 8a), whereas the M-ACT can only realize the ﬁrst type of thumb–small opposition,
which only requires thumb ﬂexion (Figure 8b). Notably, both side chambers of the 3C-ACT
were inﬂated to facilitate CMC joint ﬂexion; otherwise, type 1 and type 2 thumb–small
oppositions are impossible to achieve. Though the required angle for CMC joint ﬂexion
was 13◦ (Table 1), a rather minor value, it is critical for the thumb to make contact with the
ﬁnger or position that is away from it.
Since the 3C-ACT outperformed the M-ACT in thumb opposition support and the
M-ACT was proven to be proﬁcient at single-DoF support in Section 5.2.1, we kept the
3C-ACT as the thumb actuator and utilized the M-ACT as the four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator.
This combination of 3C-ACT and M-ACT achieved all the Kapandji scores (Figure 7c)
and a stronger pinch force than the other two combinations, especially for thumb–index
pinch and thumb–middle pinch (Table 2). The greatest pinch force, 6.2 N, was generated
between the thumb and index ﬁnger, demonstrating that the actuators can assist the hand
in gripping an object weighing no more than 1.3 kg (12.4 N). Compared with a previous
study [13] that measured 1.66 N of thumb–index pincer force using their designed actuator,
our actuators could perform more powerful hand manipulation tasks.
Accordingly, utilizing the 3C-ACT as the thumb actuator and the M-ACT as the
4-ﬁnger actuator may be the best solution for the robotic glove.
Given the advantages of the two types of thumb actuators, they may be appropriate for
distinct hand rehabilitation scenarios. For example, the M-ACT may be useful for patients
with severe ﬁnger contracture because it can urge the thumb to perform independent
abduction and ﬂexion movements, allowing the targeted muscle groups and joints to be
stretched and trained separately. The 3C-ACT may be beneﬁcial for advanced exercises
such as gross grip and ﬁnger pinch (tweezer grip) [32] to improve grip strength.
6. Contribution and Future Work
This is the ﬁrst study to comprehensively evaluate and compare whole-ﬁnger and
modular soft actuators in terms of practical thumb assist performance. The advantages
and disadvantages of the two actuator types for the thumb were analyzed, and an effective
actuator combination for a soft robotic glove was provided. Our ﬁndings highlighted:
1. The superior single-DoF support capability of the modular thumb actuator.
2. The superior multi-DoF support capability of the whole-ﬁnger thumb actuator.
Based on these ﬁndings, different thumb-assisting strategies could be taken with the
latest soft actuating technology, depending on the degree of hand function impairment.
In this study, the thumb assist performance of the two actuators was examined using
a dummy hand that imitated a participant’s hand. Similar trials on real hands or patients’
hands would be needed for a more practical evaluation. A long-term experiment is also
required to assess the effect of the proposed actuator combination (three-chamber thumb
actuator and modular four-ﬁnger ﬂexion actuator) on the rehabilitation of hand functions.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 15 of 18
Most importantly, control methods for the three-chamber and modular actuators must
be developed.
7. Conclusions
This study evaluated the design of the modular thumb actuator (M-ACT) and com-
pared it with the whole-ﬁnger thumb actuator (3C-ACT) in terms of thumb ﬂexion, abduc-
tion, opposition, and pinch strength.
The CMC unit of the modular thumb actuator was designed into two versions, one
with a center axis (version 1) and another with an off-center axis (version 2). Version 2
impelled the thumb joints to ﬂex to a greater angle and provided a larger ﬂexion force than
version 1 in addition to its comparable abduction performance to version 1.
In the comparison between the M-ACT version 2 and 3C-ACT, both types achieved the
required ﬂexion angle and provided sufﬁcient ﬂexion force; however, the M-ACT had less
undesired ﬂexion during thumb abduction, thus making it more suitable for independent
ﬂexion and abduction (single-DoF) support.
In respect to thumb opposition support, the 3C-ACT obtained a Kapandji score of 0–8,
whereas the M-ACT obtained a score of 0–5. The deﬁcit of the M-ACT in thumb opposition
support would be due to its multi-DoF support mechanism. Unlike the 3C-ACT, which
can modify its deformation in different DoF by adjusting distinct chambers, the M-ACT
cannot adjust the deformation in different DoF independently; an increase in CMC ﬂexion
angle reduces the abduction angle and vice versa. Therefore, the 3C-ACT would be more
manipulable and easier to realize thumb opposition support.
When the 3C-ACT was used for thumb assistance and the M-ACT was used for four-
ﬁnger ﬂexion support, the dummy hand performed all the opposition postures in the
Kapandji test and achieved a higher pinch force than when the two actuators were used as
thumb actuators and collaborated with a single-chamber actuator for four-ﬁnger ﬂexion,
indicating that the combination of the 3C-ACT and M-ACT may be an optimal solution for
a robotic glove.
Author Contributions: Y.W. was the main author of the manuscript. She designed, prototyped, and
tested the three-chamber actuator. S.K. designed and prototyped the modular type of ﬂexion actuator.
He was one of the main advisors of the manuscript revision. S.H. and Y.-H.H. assisted in data analysis
and participated in the revision of the manuscript. W.Y. was the main supervisor and advisor of this
work and contributed to the revision of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The ﬁrst author, Yuanyuan Wang, thanks the LOTTE Foundation for their
ﬁnancial support for her doctoral study. The authors would like to thank Zhongchao Zhou, Yuxi Lu,
Pablo E. Tortós Vinocour, and Wen Dong for their support in the experiments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
WPI whole-person impairment
RoM range of motion
DoF degree of freedom
MCP metacarpophalangeal (thumb middle joint)
CMC carpometacarpal (thumb root joint)
IP interphalangeal (thumb tip joint)
DP distal phalanx (thumb tip segment)
PP proximal phalanx (thumb middle segment)
M-ACT modular ﬁnger actuator
3C-ACT three-chamber actuator

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 16 of 18
Appendix A
Table A1. The air pressure range of actuators during thumb to ﬁnger pinching (kPa).
Actuator
combination
Thumb–Index Thumb–Middle Thumb–Ring Thumb–Small
Chamber
for
Thumb
Abduc-
tion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Flexion
Chamber
for
4-Finger
Flexion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Abduc-
tion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Flexion
Chamber
for
4-Finger
Flexion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Abduc-
tion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Flexion
Chamber
for
4-Finger
Flexion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Abduc-
tion
Chamber
for
Thumb
Flexion
Chamber
for
4-Finger
Flexion
3C-ACT
+
single-chamber ACT
150 0–240 90–150 180 0–240 160–240 195 0–240 160–240 210 0–240 150–240
M-ACT
+
single-chamber ACT
100 0–240 90–150 100 0–240 160–240 90 90–240 130–240 - - -
3C-ACT
+
M-ACT
90 0–240 230–300 150 0–240 280–300 170 120–240 300 (max) 190 150–240 260–300
Figure A1. Two strategies for thumb opposition.

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 17 of 18
Strategy one (Figure A1A): abduct the thumb ﬁrst, then ﬂex the thumb joints. The
3C-ACT achieved thumb–small opposition in 18 s, whereas the M-ACT had to repeatedly
adjust the air inﬂation in the two modules of the CMC unit (from 12 to 28 s) and did not
achieve thumb–small opposition after a sequence of air pressure adjustments. Strategy
two (Figure A1B): ﬂex the thumb joints ﬁrst, then abduct the thumb. Both the 3C-ACT
and M-ACT realized thumb–ring opposition within 18 s. 3C-ACT: three-chamber actuator;
M-ACT: modular type of thumb actuator.
References
1. Raghavan, P . The nature of hand motor impairment after stroke and its treatment.Curr. T reat. Options Cardiovasc. Med. 2007, 9,
221–228. [CrossRef]
2. Australia Government. Commission for the Safety Rehabilitation and Compensation of Commonwealth Employee; Guide to the
Assessment of the Degree of Permanent Impairment (Edition 2.1). 2009. Available online: https://www.comcare.gov.au/__data/
assets/pdf_ﬁle/0015/100905/Guide_to_the_assessment_of_the_degree_of_permanent_impairment_the_Guide_Edition_2.1_
of_the_Guide_PDF,_1.84_MB.pdf (accessed on 25 February 2022).
3. Fischer, H.C.; Triandaﬁlou, K.M.; Thielbar, K.O.; Ochoa, J.M.; Lazzaro, E.D.; Pacholski, K.A.; Kamper, D.G. Use of a Portable
Assistive Glove to Facilitate Rehabilitation in Stroke Survivors With Severe Hand Impairment. IEEE T rans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng. 2016, 24, 344–351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Proulx, C.E.; Beaulac, M.; David, M.; Deguire, C.; Haché, C.; Klug, F.; Kupnik, M.; Higgins, J.; Gagnon, D.H. Review of the effects
of soft robotic gloves for activity-based rehabilitation in individuals with reduced hand function and manual dexterity following
a neurological event. J. Rehabil. Assist. T echnol. Eng. 2020, 7, 2055668320918130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Radder, B.; Prange-Lasonder, G.B.; Kottink, A.I.R.; Melendez-Calderon, A.; Buurke, J.H.; Rietman, J.S. Feasibility of a wearable
soft-robotic glove to support impaired hand function in stroke patients. J. Rehabil. Med. 2018, 50, 598–606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Xiloyannis, M.; Cappello, L.; Khanh, D.B.; Yen, S.C.; Masia, L. Modelling and Design of a Synergy-Based Actuator for a
Tendon-Driven Soft Robotic Glove. In Proceedings of the 2016 6th IEEE International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and
Biomechatronics (BioRob), Singapore, 26–29 July 2016; pp. 1213–1219. [CrossRef]
7. Chirinos, S.C.; Vela, E.A. A Modular Soft Robotic Exoskeleton for Active Hand Rehabilitation after Stroke. In Proceedings of the
2021 IEEE Engineering International Research Conference (EIRCON), Lima, Peru, 27–29 October 2021; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
8. Yoon, J.G.; Lee, M.C. Design of tendon mechanism for soft wearable robotic hand and its fuzzy control using electromyogram
sensor. Intell. Serv. Robot. 2021, 14, 119–128. [CrossRef]
9. Jo, I.; Bae, J. Design and control of a wearable and force-controllable hand exoskeleton system. Mechatronics 2017, 41, 90–101.
[CrossRef]
10. Connolly, F.; Walsh, C.J.; Bertoldi, K. Automatic design of ﬁber-reinforced soft actuators for trajectory matching.Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2017, 114, 51–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Polygerinos, P .; Galloway, K.C.; Savage, E.; Herman, M.; Donnell, K.O.; Walsh, C.J. Soft Robotic Glove for Hand Rehabilitation
and task Speciﬁc Training. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Seattle, WA, USA,
25–30 May 2015; pp. 2913–2919. [CrossRef]
12. Polygerinos, P .; Wang, Z.; Galloway, K.C.; Wood, R.J.; Walsh, C.J. Soft robotic glove for combined assistance and at-home
rehabilitation. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2015, 73, 135–143. [CrossRef]
13. Yap, H.K.; Ang, B.W.K.; Lim, J.H.; Goh, J.C.H.; Yeow, C.-H. A Fabric-Regulated Soft Robotic Glove with User Intent Detection
Using EMG and RFID for Hand Assistive Application. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), Stockholm, Sweden, 16–21 May 2016; pp. 3537–3542. [CrossRef]
14. Polygerinos, P .; Lyne, S.; Wang, Z.; Nicolini, L.F.; Mosadegh, B.; Whitesides, G.M.; Walsh, C.J. Towards a Soft Pneumatic Glove for
Hand Rehabilitation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Tokyo, Japan,
3–7 November 2013; pp. 1512–1517. [CrossRef]
15. Gu, G.; Wang, D.; Ge, L.; Zhu, X. Analytical Modeling and Design of Generalized Pneu-Net Soft Actuators with Three-Dimensional
Deformations. Soft Robot. 2021, 8, 462–477. [CrossRef]
16. Wang, J.; Fei, Y.; Pang, W. Design, Modeling, and Testing of a Soft Pneumatic Glove With Segmented PneuNets Bending Actuators.
IEEE/ASME T rans. Mechatron. 2019, 24, 990–1001. [CrossRef]
17. Yap, H.K.; Lim, J.H.; Nasrallah, F.; Goh, J.C.H.; Yeow, R.C.H. A Soft Exoskeleton for Hand Assistive and Rehabilitation Application
Using Pneumatic Actuators with Variable Stiffness. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), Seattle, WA, USA, 26–30 May 2015; pp. 4967–4972. [CrossRef]
18. Li, M.; Wang, T.; Zhuo, Y.; He, B.; Tao, T.; Xie, J.; Xu, G. A Soft Robotic Glove for Hand Rehabilitation Training Controlled by
Movements of the Healthy Hand. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR), Kyoto, Japan,
22–26 June 2020; pp. 62–67. [CrossRef]
19. Shiota, K.; Kokubu, S.; Tarvainen, T.V .; Sekine, M.; Kita, K.; Huang, S.Y.; Yu, W. Enhanced Kapandji test evaluation of a soft robotic
thumb rehabilitation device by developing a ﬁber-reinforced elastomer-actuator based 5-digit assist system. Robot. Auton. Syst.
2018, 111, 20–30. [CrossRef]

Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3735 18 of 18
20. Heung, K.H.L.; Tong, R.K.Y.; Lau, A.T.H.; Li, Z. Robotic Glove with Soft-Elastic Composite Actuators for Assisting Activities of
Daily Living. Soft Robot. 2019, 6, 289–304. [CrossRef]
21. Heung, H.L.; Tang, Z.Q.; Shi, X.Q.; Tong, K.Y.; Li, Z. Soft Rehabilitation Actuator With Integrated Post-stroke Finger Spasticity
Evaluation. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 111. [CrossRef]
22. Guo, N.; Sun, Z.; Wang, X.; Yeung, E.H.K.; To, M.K.T.; Li, X.; Hu, Y. Simulation analysis for optimal design of pneumatic bellow
actuators for soft-robotic glove. Biocybern. Biomed. Eng. 2020, 40, 1359–1368. [CrossRef]
23. Hu, D.; Zhang, J.; Yang, Y.; Li, Q.; Li, D.; Hong, J. A Novel Soft Robotic Glove with Positive-Negative Pneumatic Actuator for
Hand Rehabilitation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, Virtual
event, 6–10 July 2020; pp. 1840–1847. [CrossRef]
24. Jones, L.A.; Lederman, S.J. Human Hand Function; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2007; pp. 141–143. [CrossRef]
25. Barakat, M.J.; Field, J.; Taylor, J. The Range of Movement of the Thumb. Hand 2013, 8, 179–182. [CrossRef]
26. Holzbauer, M.; Hopfner, M.; Haslhofer, D.; Kwasny, O.; Duscher, D.; Froschauer, S.M. Radial and palmar active range of motion
measurement: Reliability of six methods in healthy adults. J. Plast. Surg. Hand Surg. 2020, 55, 41–47. [CrossRef]
27. Wang, Y.; Kokubu, S.; Zhou, Z.; Guo, X.; Hsueh, Y.-H.; Yu, W. Designing Soft Pneumatic Actuators for Thumb Movements.IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett. 2021, 6, 8450–8457. [CrossRef]
28. Kokubu, S.; Wang, Y.; Tortós Vinocour, P .E.; Lu, Y.; Huang, S.; Nishimura, R.; Hsueh, Y.-H.; Yu, W. Evaluation of Fiber-Reinforced
Modular Soft Actuators for Individualized Soft Rehabilitation Gloves. Actuators 2022, 11, 84. [CrossRef]
29. Kapandji, A.I. Clinical evaluation of the thumb’s opposition. J. Hand Ther. 1992, 5, 102–106. [CrossRef]
30. De Kraker, M.; Selles, R.W.; Schreuders, T.A.R.; Stam, H.J.; Hovius, S.E.R. Palmar Abduction: Reliability of 6 Measurement
Methods in Healthy Adults. J. Hand Surg. 2009, 34, 523–530. [CrossRef]
31. Schuind, F.; Garcia-Elias, M.; Cooney, W.P .; An, K.-N. Flexor tendon forces:In vivo measurements. J. Hand Surg. 1992, 17, 291–298.
[CrossRef]
32. Ellegaard, K.; von Bülow, C.; Ropke, A.; Bartholdy, C.; Hansen, I.S.; Rifbjerg-Madsen, S.; Henriksen, M.; Wæhrens, E.E. Hand
exercise for women with rheumatoid arthritis and decreased hand function: An exploratory randomized controlled trial. Arthritis
Res. Ther. 2019, 21, 158. [CrossRef] [PubMed]