FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi” 
for Sof Robotics 
Ali Shtarbanov 
MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
alims@media.mit.edu 
Figure 1: (a) The FlowIO platform with all modules. (b, c, d) Three application scenarios utilizing the small, medium, and large 
pump modules for (b) wearable, (c) desktop, and (d) hybrid wearable & desktop applications, respectively. 
ABSTRACT 
FlowIO is a miniature, modular, pneumatic development platform 
with a software toolkit for control, actuation, and sensing of soft 
robots and programmable materials. Five pneumatic ports and mul-
tiple fully-integrated modules to satisfy various pressure, fow, and 
size requirements make FlowIO suitable for most wearable and non-
wearable pneumatic applications in HCI and soft robotics. FlowIO 
includes a software stack with APIs, Bluetooth capabilities, and 
web-GUI supported on all major mobile and desktop operating sys-
tems. The system is fully compatible with Arduino, JavaScript, and 
Google Chrome, while support for Scratch, Python, and Unity is 
planned for future development, making FlowIO suitable for makers 
from any technical background. Over a dozen people have used the 
FlowIO platform, ranging from high-school and college students 
to graduate students and researchers. In this paper I introduce the 
FlowIO platform, its signifcance to the HCI community, and pre-
liminary eforts towards deploying FlowIO as a community-driven 
open-source project. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing; • Human computer interac-
tion (HCI); • Interactive systems and tools; • User interface 
toolkits; 
KEYWORDS 
Platforms, Toolkits, Control Systems, Soft Robotics, Programmable 
Materials, Shape Change, Tangible User Interface (TUI), Wearables, 
Creative Learning, Community, Arduino 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
© 
2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8095-9/21/05. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513 
ACM Reference Format: 
Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic 
“Raspberry Pi” for Soft Robotics. In CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts), 
May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513 
1 INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK 
Platforms such as Arduino [1], Raspberry Pi [2], Lego Mindstorms 
[3], and Scratch [4] have liberated entire felds by diminishing 
barriers to entry. Arduino transformed electronics, Raspberry Pi 
– portable computing, Lego Mindstorms – robotics, and Scratch – 
programming. These and similar platforms [5] have not only made 
esoteric felds more accessible for artists, designers, and makers, 
but they have also enabled researchers and engineers to prototype 
more rapidly. For instance, a prototype that two decades ago may 
have required a small team of engineers and a week of work in 
a lab setting with expensive equipment, today could be done in 
a weekend, by a high-school student, in their living room! This 
transformation is thanks to: (1) the availability of platforms and 
tools that are easy to learn and use; (2) the emergence of modules 
from companies like Adafruit, designed specifcally for popular 
platforms; and (3) a growing community that is continuously con-
tributing software, projects, ideas, tutorials, and other content – 
inspiring even more people to be part of that community as both 
users and contributors. 
Today, prototyping in soft robotics and programmable materials 
has high barriers to entry and is as inaccessible to most people as 
electronics prototyping was two decades ago. This problem exists 
because the three aforementioned factors that transformed elec-
tronics prototyping have yet to occur in the domain of soft robotics. 
And I predict an analogous transformation will occur in the soft 
programmable materials domain over the next few years. In recent 
years, projects such as PneUI [6], aeroMorph [7], MorphIO [8],
Bubble [9], AuxeticBreath [10], and numerous others, demonstrate 
a growing interest in soft robotics from HCI researchers, students, 
CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Ali Shtarbanov 
artists, designers, and makers. However, a challenge faced by nearly 
everyone working on pneumatically actuated projects is that one 
typically has to build their own driving systems from the ground 
up and dedicate sometimes most of their time on developing the 
pneumatics, electronics, and software, instead of developing novel 
soft actuators, applications, or user experiences. This challenge 
creates signifcant time inefciencies, stifes innovation, and even 
discourages the pursuit of ideas requiring more sophisticated drive 
electronics or software. 
While many platforms exist for electronics and computing, plat-
forms or toolkits for soft robotics and programmable materials 
still lag far behind. The Soft Robotics Toolkit (SRT) fuidic control 
board [11], Pneuduino [12, 13], and Programmable Air [4] are the 
three most well-known pneumatic toolkit attempts. However, they 
all have major limitations – primarily their large and bulky size, 
limited sensing and control capabilities, and the need for exter-
nal pressure and/or power sources, making them impractical for 
most real-world wearable or complex soft-robotics projects, such 
as Bubble [9]. The SRT is a DIY solution with of-the-shelf parts. 
Pneuduino is smaller than SRT, has custom modular hardware, and 
comes with an Arduino library; however, it still requires exter-
nal pumps and power sources. Programmable Air provides similar 
capabilities to Pneuduino while using more afordable parts and 
integrating the pumps into the device itself. However, the base 
version has only a single pneumatic I/O port (with the possibility 
to add more), external high-current power source is still required, 
and the pumps cannot be changed easily to accommodate difer-
ent pressure or fow-rate needs. All of the aforementioned toolkits 
also lack any GUIs and are compatible only with Arduino, making 
them not entirely user friendly and accessible only to users familiar 
with Arduino programming. In contrast, FlowIO addresses all of 
the aforementioned hardware and software limitations of related 
systems. FlowIO was built to be a truly general-purpose, miniature, 
pneumatics platform that is accessible for everyone. 
FlowIO was inspired out of pure necessity when I was working 
on project Bubble in 2019 [9], which required a miniature fuidics 
driver with 5 pneumatic ports, but nothing existed to satisfy that 
need. This led me on a 2-year quest resulting in over 20 prototype 
iterations to create the world’s smallest, wearable, full-featured, 
pneumatics development platform. Continuous feedback from di-
verse users helped FlowIO become not just a toolkit but a true 
general-purpose platform technology with both hardware and soft-
ware, capable of satisfying the needs of nearly anyone working on 
wearable or non-wearable pneumatics projects, while also being 
highly user-friendly for both novice and expert users and cross-
platform compatible. 
Key Contributions: 
- Novel pneumatics development platform suitable for artists, re-
searchers, students, and makers of any background. 
- Software stack for FlowIO compatible with a variety of devices, 
operating systems, and programming languages. 
- Generalized framework for constructing modular, integrated, pneu-
matic development platforms. 
- Vision towards more seamless programmable materials prototyp-
ing. 
2 FLOWIO PLATFORM OVERVIEW 
FlowIO was designed using a frst-principles approach and was 
based on my familiarity with the challenges and unmet needs in 
the HCI, soft robotics, and maker communities, as well as the needs 
of my own future projects. FlowIO is a miniature, modular, fully-
integrated development platform with 5 pneumatic I/O ports for 
driving soft robots and other pneumatically-actuated devices. It is 
a general-purpose toolkit with modular hardware and full-stack 
software designed for the needs of researchers, makers, students, 
designers, and artists working on projects involving pneumatics. 
FlowIO consists of hardware, software, and community aspect. The 
hardware modules enable a wide variety of pneumatic applications 
with pressure ranges from -26 psi to +30 psi and variable fow-
rates up to 3.2 L/min. A complete software stack with multiple 
layers of abstraction includes libraries, frmware, APIs for Arduino 
and JavaScript, and a web-GUI accessible via the Google Chrome 
web browser from any device and operating system that supports 
Google Chrome. 
Modularity and reconfgurability are core characteristics of 
FlowIO. Integrated modules with multiple pneumatic confgura-
tions enable a user to confgure and reconfgure a FlowIO sys-
tem within seconds and on-the-fy — to satisfy their project needs 
for pressure, fow rate, and size — just by swapping magnetically-
connected modules. A complete FlowIO device consists of a main 
module and a pump module connected to each other. Expansion 
modules and accessories provide additional capabilities for broader 
range of application. Presently, three kinds of pump modules are 
available to choose from. Figure 2 shows the full list of modules 
and accessories currently in existence. The most important char-
acteristic of FlowIO, however, is the software behind it, which is 
what makes FlowIO a true platform technology suitable for nearly 
everyone. One can control FlowIO in a variety of ways including (1) 
via a web-GUI that does not require any downloads or installations 
thanks to web-Bluetooth in Google Chrome, (2) via a JavaScript 
API over Bluetooth Low Energy, (3) via direct serial commands 
sent over USB, and (4) via Arduino-compatible APIs by writing 
custom frmware. Other means of controlling FlowIO are also being 
developed and scheduled for future release, including via Python, 
Unity, and Scratch. 
3 HARDW ARE CONSTITUENTS 
The main module (controller) features up to 5 pneumatic I/O ports, 
each port supporting the actions of infation, vacuum, release to 
atmospheric pressure, pressure hold, pressure sense, and fow-rate 
variability. The main module contains 7 normally-closed solenoid 
valves in a manifold confguration of which two are for inlet and 
outlet, and the remaining fve for the I/O ports. A pressure sensor is 
connected directly to the manifold, enabling pressure-monitoring of 
any channel via time-multiplexing. Integrated is a microcontroller 
board (Adafruit Feather Sense nrf52840) with Bluetooth low-energy 
capabilities and a large number of sensors including 9-DoF IMU, 
altimeter, and light sensor among others. The main driver PCB 
features a magnetic connector with 4 pins for connection to the 
pump module, a power button with programmable auto-of timer, 
and a 14-pin expansion port providing access to I2C, SPI, UART, and 
analog GPIO pins. A 500mAh LiPo battery is located underneath 
FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi” for Sof Robotics CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 2: (top) The complete set of FlowIO modules, grouped 
into 4 categories. This set gives rise to various assemblies as 
shown by the 9 images below (bottom). 
the valves and is rechargeable via the USB port. The entire main 
module has a mass of only 77 grams. 
The pump module comes in a small, medium, and large ver-
sion to serve diferent pressure, fow-rate, or dimensional needs 
of users. The primary diference between them is the choice of 
pumps and batteries used. A pump module consists of 2 identical 
pumps, a custom driver board, and a LiPo battery, all enclosed in a 
3D printed snap-ft enclosure (Figure 3). The driver board features 
power electronics for driving the pumps, a charging circuit with a 
USB port for easy battery charging, and electronics that support 
switching between a 3.7V battery source and an external power 
source up to 24V. The pump module connects to the main module 
via a 4-pin magnetic connector and via 2 silicone tubes. I made the 
design choice to have the pump and the main modules be voltage 
independent of each other, in order to allow virtually any kind of 
DC pumps to be used with FlowIO, and for users to be able to make 
their own pump modules using any pumps they desire operating 
between 3V and 24V. Thus, I also designed the driver board to 
Figure 3: Exploded view of a FlowIO device with main mod-
ule and small pump module. 
support input and output voltages between 3V and 24V, and output 
currents up to 5 amps or more, while being highly power-efcient. 
The small, medium, and large pump modules weigh 37g, 90g, and 
251g, respectively, and their pressure and fow rate specifcations 
are listed in Table 1 
A variety of expansion modules can be connected to FlowIO 
either via the 14-pin expansion port or wirelessly via Bluetooth 
Low Energy. Three such expansion modules have been created 
so far as previously shown in Figure 2, motivated by the needs 
and requests of FlowIO users. (1) A breakout module exposes the 
14 pins of the expansion port and makes them accessible via an 
electronics breadboard, giving users access to I2C, SPI, UART, and 
additional GPIO and power pins. (2) A 16-channel analog input 
module allows a user to connect up to 16 analog sensors to the 
FlowIO device by using a set of three multiplexers, and also features 
electronics for signal conditioning. (3) Sensors++ is a standalone 
module with its own microcontroller and battery that provides 5 
additional pressure sensors as well as a variety of other sensors that 
are on the microcontroller. This module fts underneath FlowIO 
and operates as an independent system, but can communicate with 
FlowIO via Bluetooth Low Energy. FlowIO’s main module already 
provides pressure sensing at any port, but only one port at a time 
and only when a port valve is open. Sensors++ was designed exactly 
to eliminate this limitation and to extend the capabilities of FlowIO 
by allowing parallel pressure monitoring on all 5 ports, independent 
of the state of the valves. 
Accessories for FlowIO augment its capabilities and enable 
users to integrate the device seamlessly with their projects or wear 
it on their bodies. FlowIO was designed as a wearable-frst platform, 
and therefore the enclosure has tabs on the bottom to which a wrist 
strap can be attached within seconds as shown on Figure 2. The 
design allows wearability just like a wrist watch, which is especially 
valuable for assistive applications. Other kinds of straps can also 
be attached, enabling the device to be worn on the upper arm or 
leg or be attached to a belt. Additionally, a LEGO compatible enclo-
sure base makes the device easy to integrate with LEGO projects. 
Moreover, because the enclosure is 3D-printed and the design fles 
CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Ali Shtarbanov 
freely available on the FlowIO website, users have the ability to 
modify them and make FlowIO better-suited for their wearable or 
non-wearable applications. 
4 PNEUMATIC ARCHITECTURE AND 
CONFIGURATIONS 
Figure 4(a) presents the standard pneumatic confguration of FlowIO. 
A set of 7 normally-closed solenoid valves are connected in a mani-
fold (shown in green), with the rightmost serving as an inlet and 
leftmost as an outlet, with infation and vacuum pumps connected to 
them, respectively. A pressure sensor is connected to the manifold 
channel. The standard confguration supports infation, vacuum, 
pressure-sensing, pressure hold, pressure release, and fow-rate 
variability. Moreover, the same pneumatic action can be performed 
simultaneously on more than one port. The choice of normally-
closed valves allows pressure hold to occur by default, and therefore 
the system can maintain diferent pressures at diferent ports even 
in the of state. While infation and vacuum rely on the pumps, 
pressure release is passive and can happen from an initial state of 
either high pressure or vacuum. The pressure release operation 
exploits the fact that the pumps allow one-way fow even when not 
powered. Finally, fow rate variability is achieved by driving the 
pumps with PWM signals at variable duty cycles. 
The manifold-connected pressure sensors allow the pressure 
to be measured at any of the 5 ports, but only one port at a time, 
as the corresponding port valve must frst be opened. For certain 
applications requiring continuous pressure monitoring on multiple 
ports simultaneously, this poses a limitation, which is why the 
Sensors++ module was developed to address that specifc need. As 
shown in Figure 4(a1), with Sensors++ added, a pressure sensor 
Figure 4: Pneumatic architecture and all confgurations sup-
ported by FlowIO. 
Table 1: Pressure ranges and fow rate specifcations for each 
module and each confguration. Data obtained from mea-
surements. 
(shown in red) is available at the output of each port, enabling 
fully-independent pressure monitoring agnostic to valve state. 
Besides the standard confguration, FlowIO supports 4 additional 
confgurations, shown in Figure 4(b,c,d,e), where the pumps can 
be connected in series or in parallel, and either for infation or for 
vacuum. A series confguration achieves higher pressures, while a 
parallel confguration achieves higher fow rate. For example, if a 
user only needs infation and release capabilities but no vacuum, 
then they can switch to the infation series or infation parallel 
confguration for better performance. Or, if they need only vacuum 
and release capabilities, they can use the vacuum series or vacuum 
parallel confgurations. Switching between confgurations requires 
only seconds and is achieved by adding the auxiliary tube, while 
the software libraries and GUI automatically adapt to confguration 
changes with the push of a button as shown in Figure 6 
5 SOFTW ARE STACK, API’S, AND GUI 
I developed the FlowIO software in an object-oriented style and as a 
stack with multiple layers of abstraction. Each higher layer emerged 
gradually and organically as a generalization and abstraction of 
the layer underneath it, with the intent to enable highly versatile, 
intuitive, and seamless user experience suitable for a vast range 
of user preferences and application needs. Figure 5 shows all the 
layers. 
The Pneumatic driver contains the lowest level methods that 
control individual pneumatic components – pumps, valves, and 
Figure 5: FlowIO Software Stack 
FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi” for Sof Robotics CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 6: FlowIO Web-GUI. (Left) An interactive device 
graphic showing the state and confguration of the con-
nected FlowIO device. The 5 buttons besides the graphic set 
the confguration; the controls above it select the port and 
activate pneumatic actions. (Middle) A dynamic task sched-
uler allows the user to defne and execute a sequence of ac-
tions with any number of steps. (Right) A status log showing 
real-time device feedback. (Top) A tabbed interface allows 
multiple BLE devices to be connected simultaneously, and 
each tab has its own set of independent controls. 
pressure sensors. The Pneumatic API is the second layer, which 
defnes the 5 pneumatic confgurations discussed earlier and pro-
vides abstract methods that control entire procedures involving 
multiple components, switching sequences, and confgurations. The 
Command API uses a custom protocol that maps all of the func-
tions and methods supported by the Pneumatic API into 3-byte 
commands. Above that lies the FlowIO frmware which defnes 8 
custom BLE services with 15 characteristics, enabling complete 
feedback-based real-time control of FlowIO over BLE. 
The higher layers of the stack rely on Web-Bluetooth, a new 
web protocol currently supported on Google Chrome that enables a 
web page to connect with Bluetooth devices directly. Based on the 
Web-Bluetooth protocol, I developed a JavaScript API for FlowIO 
as well as a Web-GUI. This enables a user to interact with the 
FlowIO device simply by visiting the FlowIO dashboard webpage, 
and without having to download or install any software whatsoever, 
making this interaction possible from any BLE capable device and 
operating system that supports Chrome – Windows, Linux, MacOS, 
iOS, Android, and more. 
The various layers of the software stack give users the freedom 
to interact with FlowIO in a variety of ways, ranging from interact-
ing with the GUI and using the JavaScript API, to entering serial 
commands, to writing new frmware using the provided Arduino 
libraries. Moreover, I am developing additional software capabilities 
such as P2P web connectivity for remote telepresence applications 
and plan to add support for Unity, Scratch, and Python. 
6 COMMUNITY AND DEPLOYMENT 
Over a dozen people have used FlowIO, from PhD researchers to 
high-school students and makers. FlowIO was also used as a teach-
ing tool in a graduate digital fabrication course at MIT. FlowIO has 
enabled people to develop projects in various categories including 
Figure 7: Projects by users of FlowIO including a fsh, assis-
tive grasping device, compression sleeve, and more. 
interactivity, artistic expression, locomotion, telepresence, haptic 
feedback, assistive technologies, and more. The various projects 
made by users are listed on the FlowIO website, www.softrobotics.io 
(screenshot in Figure 7). 
My goal is to lead FlowIO as a continuously evolving, community-
driven project and engage the community in the development pro-
cess, by enabling others to contribute with suggestions, new mod-
ules, software, and accessories. I am currently building an online-
community platform at www.softrobotics.io, where the FlowIO 
documentation and web-GUI are located, and where people will 
also be able to post their own soft robotics projects, ideas, sugges-
tions, designs for new modules, and tools for soft programmable 
materials. The goal is to also allow users to gain visibility for their 
work and then inspire more makers, artists, and students to unleash 
their creativity in soft robotics and programmable materials. 
7 A VISION TOW ARDS SOFTROBOTICS.IO 
In this paper, I have presented FlowIO – a modular, wearable-
frst, integrated development platform for soft robotics and other 
pneumatics applications. FlowIO is just the beginning of my much 
broader vision called SoftRobotics.IO, aimed at making prototyping 
in soft robotics and programmable materials just as easy and ubiq-
uitous as prototyping in electronics is today. Pneumatic actuation is 
just one of several kinds of actuation used in HCI and Soft Robotics. 
Others include tendon-driven, electromagnetic, hydraulic, thermal, 
and more. Thus, I am extending FlowIO to go beyond pneumatics, 
by creating new modules called TendonIO, MagnetoIO and HydroIO. 
The goal is to ofer a single modular toolkit, called SoftRobotics.IO 
(Figure 8), that supports various kinds of actuation mechanisms, all 
sharing the same software APIs and GUI. This generalized platform 
will enable users to efortlessly bring to life nearly any project in 
the soft robotics and programmable materials domains, be able to 
CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 08–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 8: Ongoing and future works towards SoftRobotics.IO 
go from one actuation approach to another just by swapping a 
module, and be able to create projects requiring simultaneous use 
of multiple actuation approaches. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank all people who have used FlowIO and pro-
vided feedback and suggestions to make it better, as well as my 
academic advisor, Dr. Joseph Paradiso, for supporting this work. 
Special thanks to Ozgun Kilic Afsar, Michael Bell, Hyejun Youn, 
and Francesco Bondesani for their contributions with application 
scenarios for FlowIO. 
Ali Shtarbanov 
REFERENCES 
[1] Arduino. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2021 from http://arduino.cc 
[2] Raspberry Pi. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2021 from https://www.raspberrypi.org 
[3] Lego Mindstorms. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2021 from https://www.lego.com/en-us/ 
themes/mindstorms 
[4] Scratch. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2021 from https://scratch.mit.edu 
[5] Singh, Dhawan & Sandhu, Amanpreet & Sharma Thakur, Aditi & Priyank, Nikhil. 
(2020). An Overview of IoT Hardware Development Platforms. International 
Journal on Emerging Technologies. 
[6] Lining Yao, Ryuma Niiyama, Jifei Ou, Sean Follmer, Clark Della Silva, and Hiroshi 
Ishii. 2013. PneUI: pneumatically actuated soft composite materials for shape 
changing interfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on 
User interface software and technology (UIST ’13). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 13–22. 
[7] Ou, J., Skouras, M., Vlavianos, N., Heibeck, F., Cheng, C. Y., Peters, J., & Ishii, 
H. (2016, October). aeroMorph-heat-sealing infatable shape-change materials 
for interaction design. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User 
Interface Software and Technology (pp. 121-132). 
[8] Ryosuke Nakayama, Ryo Suzuki, Satoshi Nakamaru, Ryuma Niiyama, Yoshihiro 
Kawahara, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2019. MorphIO: Entirely Soft Sensing and Actua-
tion Modules for Programming Shape Changes through Tangible Interaction. In 
Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’19). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 975–986. 
[9] Xinlei Zhang, Ali Shtarbanov, Jiani Zeng, Valerie K. Chen, V. Michael Bove, Pattie 
Maes, and Jun Rekimoto. 2019. Bubble: Wearable Assistive Grasping Augmenta-
tion Based on Soft Infatables. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’19). Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Paper LBW2313, 1–6. 
[10] Hye Jun Youn. 2021. AuxeticBreath: Changing Perception of Respiration. In 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, 
and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, Article 76, 1–4. 
[11] D. P. Holland, et al., "The Soft Robotics Toolkit: Strategies for Overcoming Obsta-
cles to the Wide Dissemination of Soft-Robotic Hardware, " IEEE Robotics and 
Automation Magazine, Special Issue on Open Source and Widely Disseminated 
Robot Hardware, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 57-64, 2017. 
[12] Pneuduino. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2021 from http://pneuduino.org 
[13] Jifei Ou, Felix Heibeck, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. TEI 2016 Studio: Infated Curiosity. 
In Proceedings of the TEI ‘16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Em-
bedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ‘16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 766-769. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2854119 
[14] Programmable Air. Retrieved Jan. 8, 2021 from https://www.programmableair. 
com 