Andrew A. Stanley1
Facebook Reality Labs,
10545 Willows Rd.,
Redmond 98052, WA
e-mail: astan@fb.com
Amirhossein Amini
Facebook Reality Labs,
10545 Willows Rd.,
Redmond 98052, WA
Casey Glick
Facebook Reality Labs,
10545 Willows Rd.,
Redmond 98052, WA
Nathan Usevitch
Facebook Reality Labs,
10545 Willows Rd.,
Redmond 98052, WA
Yi/C21git Meng€uc¸
Facebook Reality Labs,
10545 Willows Rd.,
Redmond 98052, WA
Sean J. Keller
Facebook Reality Labs,
10545 Willows Rd.,
Redmond 98052, WA
Lumped-Parameter Response
Time Models for Pneumatic
Circuit Dynamics
Resistor–capacitor (RC) response time models for pressurizing and depressurizing a
pneumatic capacitor (mass accumulator) through a resistor (ﬂow restriction) comprise a
framework to systematically analyze complex ﬂuidic circuits. A model for pneumatic
resistance is derived from a combination of fundamental ﬂuid mechanics and experimen-
tal results. Models describing compressible ﬂuid capacitance are derived from thermody-
namic ﬁrst principles and validated experimentally. The models are combined to derive
the ordinary differential equations that describe the RC dynamics. These equations are
solved analytically for rigid capacitors and numerically for deformable capacitors to
generate pressure response curves as a function of time. The dynamic pressurization and
depressurization response times to reach 63.2 % (or 1 /C0 e
/C0 1) of exponential decay are
validated in simple pneumatic circuits with combinations of ﬂow restrictions ranging
from 100 lm to 1 mm in diameter, source pressures ranging from 5 to 200 kPa, and
capacitor volumes of 0.5 to 16 mL. Our RC models predict the response times, which
range from a few milliseconds to multiple seconds depending on the combination, with a
coefﬁcient of determination of r 2 ¼ 0:983. The utility of the models is demonstrated in a
multicomponent ﬂuidic circuit to ﬁnd the optimal diameter of tubing between a three-way
electromechanical valve and a pneumatic capacitor to minimize the response time for the
changing pressure in the capacitor. These lumped-parameter models represent founda-
tional blocks upon which timing models of pneumatic circuits can be built for a variety of
applications from soft robotics and industrial automation to high-speed microﬂuidics.
[DOI: 10.1115/1.4049009]
1 Introduction and Motivation
In the early days of computing, both ﬂuidics and electronics
showed promise as logic elements for general-purpose digital
computers, including the ﬂuid operated digital automatic com-
puter (FLODAC), constructed from ﬂuid jet-based ampliﬁers in
the 1960s [ 1], and the more famous electrical cousin, the elec-
tronic numerical integrator and computer (ENIAC), constructed of
vacuum tubes in the 1940s. Over the remainder of the 20th cen-
tury, the electrical transistor progressed to power the greatest
advances in modern technology while the ﬂuidic switches largely
disappeared from view. However, in recent decades, microﬂuidic
large-scale integration [2] has shown potential in new ﬂuid control
applications, driving the size of ﬂuidic components smaller and
into increasingly complex circuits. One application area, the ﬁeld
of soft robotics, has found use for ﬂuidic circuits in demonstra-
tions ranging from oscillating octopus arms [ 3] to crawling [ 4]
and rolling [ 5]. These robots exhibit response times in the range
of seconds to tens of seconds and are modeled with linear ﬂuidic
analogies to linear electrical timing models or application-speciﬁc
ﬂuidic timing models. Linear resistance models for duct ﬂow
require several assumptions, including purely viscous losses, fully
developed laminar (low Reynolds number) ﬂow, and incompressi-
ble ﬂuids. Linear capacitance models rely on linear material defor-
mation properties and often neglect important thermodynamic
considerations. A more general timing model for pneumatic com-
ponents should include nonlinear effects due to compressible ﬂu-
ids, the inertial losses from turbulence caused by faster ﬂow and
ﬂow through bending or rough pipes, and the thermodynamic
effects of expansions and contractions. Such a model would allow
improved optimization of component designs and pneumatic cir-
cuits for speed.
In electrical timing models, resistors ( R), inductors ( L), and
capacitors ( C) provide the fundamental passive building blocks
for circuit analysis. Fluidic circuit analogies exist for each of these
three components [6,7], where pressure ( P) is analogous to voltage
(V) and volumetric or mass ﬂow (Q or _m, respectively) is analogous
to current ( i). While inductance plays an important role in the
dynamics of hydraulic systems, exhibited in second-order dynamic
effects like the ringing of a “water hammer,” our focus on pneu-
matic systems allows us to neglect this piece of the timing model
due to the low density of air. This ﬁrst-order dynamics assumption
is validated by signiﬁcant response time testing in this paper.
This paper deﬁnes a pneumatic response time model as a build-
ing block of a framework that generalizes to many devices, cir-
cuits, and wide pressure ranges while relying on only two
parameters, compressible resistance (R), and capacitance (C) that
can either be directly measured or calculated for any given device.
Rather than choosing a single application or design to model and
ﬁt with phenomenological resistance and capacitance parameters,
we aim to build models for simpler foundational building blocks that
can combine to cover a wide range of systems. As a result, we start
with rigid, precision-machined components before adding in linear
springs to demonstrate how any measured or designed material
model can be included in our lumped-parameter resistor–capacitor
(RC) ﬂuid dynamics models. We derive a general pneumatic capaci-
tance model from thermodynamic ﬁrst principles. The relationship
between pressure drop and ﬂow rate in a duct does not generalize so
easily, forcing us to combine fundamental ﬂuid mechanics with
experimental results to build a lumped-parameter model for resist-
ance. We take care to experimentally validate any assumptions we
make in order to lump parameters into simpliﬁed models.
We can abstract the building blocks of soft robotics and micro-
ﬂuidics systems as three subsystems: an input pressure source res-
ervoir, a ﬂow restriction like a valve or tube, and an output into an
1Corresponding author.
Contributed by the Dynamic Systems Division of ASME for publication in the
JOURNAL OF DYNAMIC SYSTEMS,M EASUREMENT, AND CONTROL. Manuscript received
December 10, 2019; ﬁnal manuscript received October 9, 2020; published online
November 18, 2020. Assoc. Editor: Roger Fales.
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control MAY 2021, Vol. 143 / 051001-1
Copyright VC 2021 by ASME
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

application-speciﬁc capacitive reservoir like a soft actuator. The
electrical analogies for these subsystems are shown in Fig. 1.W e
discuss existing ﬂuidic RC models and applications in Sec. 2.I n
Sec. 3, we derive a lumped-parameter model for the resistance of
air ﬂow through such a contraction and experimentally validate it
with precision-machined oriﬁces before demonstrating that this
model extends to relatively short ( L/d /C28 1000) tubes and multiple
air resistors in series. In Sec. 4, we derive a pneumatic capacitance
model from ﬁrst thermodynamic principles. To fully validate
these models into simple dynamic RC circuits in Sec. 5, we com-
bine resistors and capacitors into dynamic response time tests of
the circuit shown in Fig. 1. The electrical analogy assumes that the
ﬁrst high-pressure reservoir and drain to atmosphere are large
enough to be modeled as an ideal source and ground sink, respec-
tively, though with the modeling framework presented in this paper
one could easily replace the ideal source or drain with additional
capacitor components. Finally, we demonstrate how this framework
can optimize the selection of a tubing diameter for overall system
response time in Sec. 6. Ultimately, ﬂuid mechanics provides only
one piece of the timing of a soft robotics system (in addition to
material properties and electromechanical valving), but it is a key
component that warrants a more rigorous, generalizable analysis.
2 Background
Timing for microﬂuidic computing has previously been
explored through embodiments as complex as ring oscillators [ 8],
comparators [ 9], and serial-in parallel-out shift registers [ 10].
However, diagnostics [ 11], drug delivery [ 12], and biological lab
automation [ 2] represent the driving applications behind the bulk
of this research, for which timing models are not critical and out-
put volumes and ﬂow rates are intentionally small (on the order of
nanoliters [ 13] or smaller, and often in the form of droplets
[14,15]), resulting in responses that are relatively slow (on the
order of seconds or longer) [ 10]. At these scales, viscous and cap-
illary effects dominate pressure losses in what Squires and Quake
call “inertial irrelevance” [ 16]. The resistor models are thus
assumed to be a linear function of pressure drop
R ¼
Ph /C0 Pl
_m (1)
where Ph is the high pressure at the inlet to the resistor, Pl is the
low pressure at the outlet, _m is the mass ﬂow rate, and R is the lin-
ear resistance. One can substitute volumetric ﬂow rate, Q, for
mass ﬂow rate by a factor of the ﬂuid density, q, but because this
can lead to confusion for compressible ﬂuids where the density
varies signiﬁcantly with pressure and temperature we work exclu-
sively with mass ﬂow in this paper. These linear models from the
microﬂuidics literature, while valid at scales below thousands of
Pascals and tens of microns for incompressible ﬂuids, have been
applied to domains across signiﬁcantly larger size and pressure
scales with signiﬁcant geometric complexities, and even to com-
pressible ﬂuids [ 4,5,17]. Any of these three scenarios individually,
let alone all of them together, invalidates the fundamental assump-
tions necessary to generate linear equations of ﬂow resistance and
thus the Hagen–Poiseuille equation no longer applies.
To power soft robots and high-speed microﬂuidics, higher ﬂow
rates are required to generate faster response times for ﬁlling and
draining ﬂuidic capacitors on the order of milliliters. Furthermore,
the pressures needed to generate noticeable forces in small actua-
tors are orders of magnitude higher than the pressures in existing
microﬂuidic systems. Linear resistor models do not accurately
describe the complexity of the ﬂuid mechanics at these scales, par-
ticularly when the working ﬂuid is compressible. We address the
nonlinearities introduced by removing the laminar, fully devel-
oped, incompressible ﬂow assumptions while maintaining a
single-parameter resistance ﬁt in Sec. 3.
Fluidic capacitance (C) is deﬁned as the change of mass ( dm)i n
a container due to its pressure changing by an amount dP
C ¼
dm
dP (2)
which for incompressible ﬂuids can also be described as the
change in volume for a given change in pressure. Capacitance
models for incompressible ﬂuids [ 7] are determined by the mate-
rial properties [ 9], which affect how much the volume, and there-
fore the mass enclosed, changes with pressure. Often the
relationship between pressure and volume is assumed to be linear
so that capacitance is constant [ 18–20]. Existing models for com-
pressible ﬂuids either ignore the compressibility effects and use
incompressible models [ 21] or consist of a simple calculation
using the ideal gas law for a rigid capacitor using compressible
ﬂuids with an isothermal assumption [ 5]. In Sec. 4, we derive a
lumped-parameter capacitance for both deformable containers and
compressible ﬂuids from thermodynamic ﬁrst principles.
3 Lumped-Parameter Resistance Models
For our lumped-parameter pneumatic resistance model, we
focus on nonlinear behavior where inertial losses dominate vis-
cous losses for two reasons. First, for a millimeter-scale system to
pressurize or depressurize on a short (milliseconds) time scale, the
peak ﬂow rates will likely be turbulent. Second, and more crit-
ically, even if the peak ﬂow is laminar or for the ﬁnal portion of a
pressurization response near equilibrium that happens at laminar
ﬂow rates, local recirculation regions still exist around nonuni-
form geometry features. Even for smooth pipes with low Reynolds
numbers, the ratio of the length, L, to the diameter, d, plays an
important role in determining whether viscous or inertial forces
will dominate. While “typical pipe ﬂow applications involve an
L/d value of 1000 or more, in which case the entrance effect may
be neglected and a simple analysis made for fully developed
ﬂow,” [ 22] ﬂuidic routing and tubing in both microﬂuidics and
soft robotics often fall in a regime where the inviscid entrance
region plays a major role in the ﬂow characteristics ( L/d /C28 1000).
Thus, it is an oversimpliﬁcation to neglect “minor losses,” from
expansions, contractions, bends, and valves to use a linear viscous
resistance model, and in many systems, these complicating fea-
tures are the most important for component design and can con-
tribute signiﬁcantly more to pressure drop than viscous losses.
3.1 Compressible Fluid Resistance Derivation. Consider a
ﬂuidic resistor with a given geometry working in a system where
the ﬂow is not choked. To relate the pressure loss DP ¼ P
h /C0 Pl
to mass ﬂow rate, we ﬁrst employ the well-known minor-loss rela-
tionship [22], i.e.,
DP ¼ 1
2 KqU2 (3)
which is often used to produce experimentally measured coefﬁ-
cients for pipe entrance or exit, sudden expansion or contraction,
Fig. 1 A dynamic ﬂuidic circuit of pressurizing and depressu-
rizing an accumulator through a three way valve with a ﬂow
restriction is analogous to a simple RC electrical circuit
051001-2 / Vol. 143, MAY 2021 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

bends, elbows, tees, and other ﬁttings, valves (open or partially
closed), and gradual expansions or contraction. Here, K is known
as the loss coefﬁcient, q represents the density, and U denotes the
average velocity. Next, employ conservation of mass
_m ¼ qAU (4)
where A represents the cross-sectional area normal to the ﬂow
direction. As a result, the pressure-ﬂow relationship takes the fol-
lowing form:
qDP ¼ K
2A2 _m2 (5)
Finally, we group all constant values into a single parameter to be
measured experimentally. For the incompressible ﬂuid both the
density and minor-loss coefﬁcient are independent of pressure for
a given geometry. Thus, the pressure ﬂow relationship (5) can be
simpliﬁed into
DP ¼ R
i _m2 (6)
where Ri is the incompressible resistance of the device which can
be measured experimentally. To account for variable density and
minor-loss coefﬁcient in compressible ﬂow, we modify (5) as
qhDP ¼ Y _m2 (7)
where qh represents the inlet density and Y includes all constants
and the correction factor for compressibility which generally
depends on the absolute values of pressure. Moreover, we apply
an experimentally validated assumption and assume that the cor-
rection factor depends linearly on the pressure ratio, i.e.,
Y ¼ C
o
Ph
Pl
(8)
where Co is constant for a given geometry. We consider this
assumption together with constant temperature ideal gas law at
the inlet to group all parameters that are constant into the com-
pressible resistance Rc deﬁned as
PlDP ¼ Rc _m2 (9)
For compressible ﬂuids, as the downstream pressure Pl is
reduced, the ﬂow _m increases until the ﬂuid velocity through the
resistor becomes sonic. At this point, _m becomes independent of
further reductions in Pl and the ﬂow is said to be choked. The tran-
sition to choked ﬂow occurs at the choking pressure P/C3
l at the local
maximum of _m, which occurs for P/C3
l ¼ð Ph=2Þ. By inserting this
back into Eq. (9), we can ﬁnd the choked ﬂow rate _m/C3 as
_m/C3 ¼ Ph
2 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃRc
p (10)
Thus, the full resistance model for unchoked and choked ﬂow
takes the form of
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Rc
p
_m ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pl Ph /C0 PlðÞ
p
for 1
2 Ph /C20 Pl /C20 Ph
1
2 Ph for 0 < Pl /C20 1
2 Ph
8
>><
>>
:
(11)
Finally, we conduct a change of variables
R
†
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Rc
p
(12)
where R
†
is our lumped resistance parameter in dimensions of
pressure/ﬂow similar to the linear resistor models used in micro-
ﬂuidics. Our combined unchoked and choked model is deﬁned as
R
†
_m ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pl Ph /C0 PlðÞ
p
for 1
2 Ph /C20 Pl /C20 Ph
1
2 Ph for 0 /C20 Pl /C20 1
2 Ph
8
>><
>>
:
(13)
Note that while all experimental data in this paper are shown in
units of gage pressure for intuitive interpretation, the models
require units of absolute pressure.
3.2 Orifice Resistance Experimental Validation. To vali-
date the resistance model in Eq. (13), we generated a set of ﬂow-
pressure curves for a set of precision-machined Beswick oriﬁces
ranging in diameter from 100 lm to 1 mm. Our experimental
setup included a Honeywell (Charlotte, NC) ASDX Series pres-
sure sensor located on each side of the oriﬁce, each connected to a
Hoerbiger (Zug, Switzerland) Pre-U2 pressure regulator to pre-
cisely control both the high inlet pressure and the low outlet pres-
sure of the oriﬁce. A Honeywell Zephyr high accuracy ﬂow
(HAF) series mass ﬂow sensor located upstream of the high-
pressure sensor measures the ﬂow through the resistor. A sche-
matic of this experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2.
The set of ﬂow-pressure curves for each resistor is generated
through ﬁve separate pressure sweeps repeated twice each. In the
ﬁrst sweep, the low pressure is held constant at atmosphere while
the high pressure is swept slowly from atmosphere up to 200 kPa
gage (301 kPa absolute) and back down to atmosphere, which we
call a “high pressure sweep.” The other four curves consist of
holding the high “source” pressure constant at either 50, 100, 150,
or 200 kPa gage while the low pressure is swept from atmosphere
up to the value of the constant high source pressure and back
down to atmosphere, which we refer to as a “low-pressure sweep.”
We sweep the pressures slowly enough to ensure that we do not
see any hysteresis in the resulting ﬂow-pressure curves. Thus, we
can consider each data point to have been collected at a steady-
state or “quasi-static” equilibrium where holding the high and low
pressures steady at those values would result in a constant ﬂow of
the measured value at the ﬂow sensor upstream of the resistor and
pressure sensors. The time history of a complete set of sweeps to
generate a set of pressure-ﬂow curves is shown in Fig. 3(a).
An example set of data collected for ﬂow-pressure sweeps on a
100 lm diameter oriﬁce is shown in Fig. 3(b). Due to dependence of
compressible ﬂow rate on absolute pressure and not only pressure
drop, the same pressure drops result in higher ﬂow rates for the low-
pressure sweep where the upstream pressure is held high than for the
high-pressure sweep where the downstream pressure is held low.
In Fig. 4, we plot the oriﬁce resistance as a function of diame-
ter. Three unique oriﬁces were tested at each size in both ﬂow
directions, resulting in six data points at each diameter tested. The
Fig. 2 Block diagram of the experimental setup to generate the
ﬂow-pressure curves of a ﬂuidic resistor. Pneumatic connec-
tions are shown above and electrical connections are shown
below.
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control MAY 2021, Vol. 143 / 051001-3
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

results show that the R
†
resistance scales with 1 =d2 for oriﬁce
plates.
3.3 Compressible Resistance of Tubing. For oriﬁce plates
or valves, it appears safe to assume that inertial “minor” losses
dominate viscous losses. For tubes, however, this assumption will
eventually break down as the ratio of the length of the tube to the
diameter of the tube ( L/d) grows. To experimentally test the value
of L/d where our inertial resistance model breaks down and vis-
cous losses must be considered, we used a wire electrical dis-
charge machining process to precisely manufacture tubes with an
inner diameter of 1 mm at lengths of 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 mm and
repeated the ﬂow-pressure experiments we used to test the resist-
ance of the oriﬁces. The results in Fig. 5 show that for this particu-
lar diameter of tube, the viscous losses start to change the shape
of the ﬂow-pressure curve when L=d > 40. However, even as L/d
grows to 80, the entirely inertial R
†
model still captures the bulk
of the resistance behavior ( r2 ¼ 0:987), so we remain conﬁdent
that we can apply this model to relatively short tubes in more
complex pneumatic circuits. We also tested ﬁve tubes at diameters
of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1, and 2 mm each with a length of 20 mm to
validate that R
†
resistance scales with 1 =d2 for these tubes as it
did for oriﬁce plates.
3.4 Air Resistors in Series. Unlike electrical resistors or lin-
ear models of microﬂuidic resistors which simply sum in series,
the behavior of air resistors in series is too complicated to be
solved analytically. This is in part due to the nonlinear nature of
the ﬂow and in part due to the choking effect that creates a piece-
wise function. Both of these aspects are captured by the R
†
ﬁt in
Eq. (13), which, because it is contained to a single lumped param-
eter, we can build into a custom simulation block that will work
with any number of components in series or parallel.
To experimentally validate that our lumped-parameter resistor
model is suitable for chaining multiple resistors together in series,
we ran ﬂow-pressure tests with two of the wire electrical dis-
charge machining steel tubes, each 10 mm in length with a 1 mm
diameter. We added an additional pressure sensor between the
two tubes, in addition to the high-pressure sensor upstream and
the low-pressure sensor downstream of the two tubes. This middle
pressure sensor simply provided data for us to calculate the pres-
sure drop across each of the resistors individually, unlike the high
and low-pressure sensors which are also used for feedback control
of the high and low-pressure regulators. After ﬁtting an R
†
resist-
ance value to a single tube, we can simulate how we expect two to
behave in series.
The results in Fig. 6 validate the expected complexity of com-
bining air resistors in series while also providing additional conﬁ-
dence in our R
†
resistance model to predict their behavior even
when multiple components are combined. Whereas two linear
resistors in series would expect to show half the ﬂow for the same
pressure drop as a single resistor, adding a second air resistor only
reduces the total ﬂow by 20–30% depending on the pressure drop.
Additional insights from simulating and testing two equal air
resistors in series include that nearly two thirds of the pressure
drop occurs across the downstream resistor, which enters a choked
condition well before the upstream resistor as the pressure drop
increases. The shape of the ﬂow-pressure curves for the combined
resistors in series is notably different from the shape of the curves
for an individual resistor but the simulation predicts this complex
behavior very accurately ( r
2 > 0:99 for all individual and com-
bined segments).
4 Lumped-Parameter Capacitance Models
An accurate dynamic model of ﬂuidic circuits requires the char-
acterization of the capacitance of ﬂexible and rigid cavities when
ﬁlled with a compressible ﬂuid such as air, where the capacitance
C ¼ dm=dP relates the change in mass to the change in pressure.
The simplest case to derive is a rigid cavity in isothermal (con-
stant temperature) conditions. For dynamic processes that happen
on a faster time scale than heat transfer into or out of the system,
an adiabatic (no heat transfer to or from the environment) assump-
tion is more realistic. In this paper, we derive the capacitance rela-
tionship using an adiabatic assumption by considering a variable
Fig. 3 ( a) The time history of the pressures commanded to run
a pressure-ﬂow test, color coded by region to match the curves
generated by measuring the ﬂow through a resistor shown in
Figs. 3(b) and 3(b) a sample of set of ﬂow-pressure curves for a
100um-diameter precision machined oriﬁce resistor with the
single parameter R
y
ﬁt generated by Eq. (13) shown overlaid
Fig. 4 Running sets of ﬂow-pressure curves for a set of oriﬁ-
ces across an order of magnitude of diameters shows a clear
scaling of R
y
with the inverse square of the diameter
051001-4 / Vol. 143, MAY 2021 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

Fig. 5 ( a) Resistance testing of precision manufactured tubes with L/d of 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 shows that the viscous losses
have small effects compared to the inertial losses at these scales. ( b)U pt o L/d 5 20 the inertial R
y
model ﬁts well ( r 2 5 0:998)
but for ( c) L/d 5 40 and ( d) L/d 5 80 the viscous losses start to change the shape of the pressure-ﬂow curves and the quality
of the ﬁt decreases ( r 2 5 0:996 and r 2 5 0:987, respectively).
Fig. 6 A pair of equal air resistors in series have noticeably different behavior from a single air resistor and do not sum sim-
ply like two linear resistors, but a simulation using the R
y
resistance model for each resistor captures this complex behavior.
The resistors that generated this data were tubes with L 5 10 mm and of d 5 1 mm: (a) individual tube resistor, ( b) two equal
tube resistors in series, ( c) upstream of two resistors in series, and ( d) downstream of two resistors in series.
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control MAY 2021, Vol. 143 / 051001-5
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

temperature within the container over time and using relationships
taken from conservation of mass, conservation of energy, and the
ideal gas equation of state. We also provide the simpler isothermal
capacitance equations for comparison or use in slower response
time applications.
4.1 Isothermal and Adiabatic Capacitance. Consider a
deformable container connected to a constant pressures source P
s,
as shown in Fig. 7. The container pressure, temperature, and den-
sity are represented by PcðtÞ; TcðtÞ and qcðtÞ, respectively. The
volume of the container is denoted by VcðtÞ¼ Vo þ VmðtÞ, where
Vo is the undeformed volume and Vm is the volume created as a
result of membrane deformation due to the imbalance between
PcðtÞ and the environment pressure Po. Initially, we assume the
pressure is the same inside and outside of the container, i.e.,
Pcð0Þ¼ Po. Accordingly, the volume is initially assumed to be
undeformed, i.e., Vmð0Þ¼ 0 and Vcð0Þ¼ Vo.
Assume that the valve opens at t ¼ 0 and as a result PcðtÞ
increases from Po to Ps. The dynamics of this process depends on
the resistance between the source and container and the capaci-
tance of the container which will be discussed in Sec. 5. In this
section, we limit our attention to the capacitance of the container.
The conservation of mass indicates that the mass ﬂux _min into
the container is equal to the rate of change of mass _mc inside the
container, i.e.,
dmin
dt ¼ dmc
dt ¼ Vo þ VmðÞ dqc
dt þ qc
dVm
dt (14)
Moreover, to relate the density change term dqc=dt to pressure
change, we employ the ideal gas law for the ﬂuid inside the con-
tainer. For the isothermal case, i.e., when TcðtÞ¼ To
dqc
dt ¼ 1
RTo
dPc
dt (15)
where R is the speciﬁc gas constant. As a result of replacing the
density change term in Eq. (14) with Eq. (15) and rearranging the
result as dmin=dt ¼ CdPc=dt, we obtain the isothermal
capacitance
Cisothermal ¼ qo
Po
Vo þ Vm þ Pc
dVm
dPc
/C18/C19
(16)
For a rigid container, the volume remains undeformed and all
terms associated with Vm vanish. Accordingly, the isothermal
capacitance for a rigid container is simpliﬁed into
Cisothermal
rigid ¼ qoVo
Po
(17)
For the adiabatic case, a new unknown, dTc=dt, is added to the
problem since the temperature is no longer constant. As a result,
the ideal gas law is not sufﬁcient to close the problem and must be
supported by conservation of energy. Similar to the isothermal
case, we employ the ideal gas law to relate the density change
term dq
c=dt to pressure change, i.e.,
dPc
dt ¼ dqc
dt RTc þ qcR dTc
dt (18)
To quantify dTc=dt, we employ the conservation of energy for
an open system with an inlet
_Q /C0 _W ¼ _Esys /C0 _minðhi þ V2
i þ gziÞ (19)
where _Q is the rate of heat transfer into the system, _W is the rate
of work done by the ﬂuid, _Esys is the rate of change of the system
internal energy, _min is the rate of mass entering the system with
enthalpy hi, velocity Vi and gravitational potential energy gzi. Per
our adiabatic assumption, we assume _Q ¼ 0. We neglect the con-
tributions of inlet velocity and the gravitational potential energy,
as those effects tend to be small relative to other terms. We write
E
sys ¼ cvmcTc where cv is the speciﬁc heat of the ﬂuid at constant
volume, and hi ¼ cpTin, where cp is the speciﬁc heat at constant
pressure. We apply conservation of mass to write _min ¼ _mc.
Applying these relationships to Eq. (19), considering c ¼ cp=cv,
and rearranging the result to isolate dTc=dt, we obtain
dTc
dt ¼ 1
mc
cTin /C0 TcðÞ dmc
dt /C0
_W
cv
(20)
Next, we substitute Eq. (20) into Eq. (18), and combine the
result with Eq. (14) to achieve
dmc
dt ¼ 1
cRTin
Vo þ VmðÞ dPc
dt þ R
cv
dW
dt þ Pc
dVm
dt
/C18/C19
(21)
We then approximate the rate of work as _W ¼ PcdVm=dt,
assume that the inlet temperature remains constant Tin ¼ To, apply
Meyer’s Relationships, i.e., cp /C0 cv ¼ R, and rearrange the result
to obtain an expression for adiabatic capacitance
Cadiabatic ¼ qo
cPo
Vo þ Vm þ cPc
dVm
dPc
/C18/C19
(22)
Accordingly, the adiabatic capacitance for a rigid chamber is
Cadiabatic
rigid ¼ qoVo
cPo
(23)
We note that the deﬁnition of capacitance for a ﬂexible cham-
ber is ill-posed without a material pressure volume curve since it
depends on ðdVm=dPcÞ.
4.2 Compressible Capacitance Experimental Validation.
We measure capacitance in a setup designed to minimize leakage
and parasitic capacitance from dead volume or soft materials. We
validate our rigid models with a set of precision machined alumi-
num volumes at sizes of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 mL, as well as
three linearly deformable capacitors that consist of a low friction
(Braun medical periﬁx loss of resistance) syringe with a coil
spring, shown in the dynamic RC experimental setup in Sec. 5.
The 0 mL capacitor gives us a baseline for the amount of parasitic
capacitance in the setup that we then subtract out from the other
capacitance data. The experiment consists of slowly (30 s) ramp-
ing the source pressure while recording the pressure in the capaci-
tor while measuring the mass ﬂow rate into or out of the
capacitor. We differentiate the pressure data with respect to time
and divide the mass ﬂow rate by this time-correlated data to ﬁnd
the capacitance as a function of pressure. Data from the rigid
capacitors are shown in Fig. 8. The slow ramp in pressure, along
Fig. 7 Schematic of the ﬂexible capacitor analyzed in this
document. Vo is the volume when Pc 5 Po. The ambient pres-
sure is Po. The volume increase due to the material deformation
at pressure Ps is denoted Vm.
051001-6 / Vol. 143, MAY 2021 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

with high rate of heat transfer from the aluminum material leads
to values closer to the isothermal model than the adiabatic model
in the capacitance characterization test. In the dynamic tests in
Sec. 5, there is less time for heat transfer and therefore we use the
adiabatic approximation for RC responses.
Data for the spring capacitors with either a 0 mL (i.e., just a
pressure sensor) or 5 mL rigid volume in parallel are shown in
Fig. 9. The spring-loaded pistons have inner diameters of
15.6 mm, and therefore a cross-sectional area, A, of 765 mm
2 and
spring stiffness values, k, of 1000, 1700, and 4600 N/m. To calcu-
late the theoretical capacitance for these deformable capacitors,
we know that the force balance on the piston is
PcA /C0 PoA ¼ kx (24)
where x is the distance the piston is pushed to expand the volume
in the syringe, and that the volume deformed by the pressure is
Vm ¼ Ax (25)
Combining Eqs. (24) and (25) gives
Vm ¼ð Pc /C0 PoÞA2=k (26)
which we differentiate with respect to the pressure in the
capacitor
dVm
dPc
¼ A2=k (27)
Combining Eqs. (26) and (27) with our capacitance models in
Eqs. (17) and (22) gives the isothermal capacitance of a linear
spring-loaded deformable container as
Cisothermal
spring ¼ qoVo
Po
/C0 qoA2
k þ 2qoA2
Pok Pc (28)
and the adiabatic capacitance of a linear spring-loaded deformable
as
Cadiabatic
spring ¼ qoVo
cPo
/C0 qoA2
k þ 1 þ cðÞ qoA2
cPok Pc (29)
5 Dynamic Resistor–Capacitor Models
Given that we are assuming negligible inductance, we can focus
our dynamic system modeling on RC models. A basic RC circuit
is shown in Fig. 1. In the ﬂuidic analogy of this simple circuit, the
voltage source is replaced with a pressure supply and the switch is
a 3-way electromechanical valve that drains to atmosphere. We
ﬁrst review the established linear RC timing model before com-
bining our ﬂuidic resistance and capacitance models to achieve
the governing ordinary differential equations (ODEs) for pressure
response and experimentally validate the models with response
time tests.
5.1 Analytical Solutions to Response Time Ordinary Dif-
ferential Equations. The linear RC circuit and the laws that gov-
ern its dynamics form a linear ODE that can easily be solved
analytically. Rearranging Eq. (2) and differentiating with respect
to time gives
Fig. 8 Top: Capacitance measurements as a function of pres-
sure for rigid containers with air as the working ﬂuid. Bottom:
Comparison of the experimental data for rigid containers with
the theoretical models. These slow quasi-static capacitance
tests allow more time for heat transfer than the dynamic RC
tests and thus more closely match the isothermal model than
the adiabatic model used in Sec. 5.
Fig. 9 Capacitance curves for three linear spring-loaded pis-
tons with two different values of Vo, with the rigid dead volume
capacitance measurements provide experimental validation for
the theoretical isothermal deformable capacitance models
shown dotted
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control MAY 2021, Vol. 143 / 051001-7
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

dm
dt ¼ C dP
dt (30)
where dm/dt can be substituted for _m in Eq. (1). Setting Ph equal
to the source pressure Ps and Pl equal to the pressure of the capac-
itor Pc with an initial condition of Pcð0Þ¼ Po, where the initial
pressure Po is typically atmospheric pressure, results in the differ-
ential equation
Ps /C0 Pc ¼ RC dPc
dt (31)
Solving Eq. (31) gives the pressure in the capacitor any given
time, t
Pc tðÞ ¼ Ps /C0 PoðÞ 1 /C0 e/C0 t
RCðÞ þ Po (32)
where Ps is the source pressure and s ¼ RC, known as the time con-
stant, gives the amount of time to reach the 63.2% point of exponen-
tial decay. Because this is a linear system, Eqs.(31) and (32) hold for
both pressurizing and depressurizing the capacitor by simply swap-
ping all instances ofPo and Ps for the case of depressurization.
The complexity increases when we replace the linear resistor
with a compressible ﬂow resistor, even if we keep the capacitance
constant and ignore choking effects. Unlike the linear resistance
model, the compressible resistance model in Eq. (13) is direction
dependent, resulting in slightly different governing ODEs for the
pressurization (rise response)
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pc Ps /C0 PcðÞ
p
¼ R
†
C dPc
dt (33)
and depressurization (fall response)
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Po Pc /C0 PoðÞ
p
¼ R
†
C dPc
dt (34)
of a ﬂuidic capacitor. Solving these ODEs analytically using a
symbolic solver, we get different solutions for rise and fall
dynamics. The analytical solution for the dynamics of the rise
response is
Pc;rise tðÞ ¼ Po
Ps
2Po
þ cos t
R
†
C
/C18/C19
/C0 Ps
2Po
cos t
R
†
C
/C18/C19/C18
þ sin t
R
†
C
/C18/C19 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ps
Po
/C0 1
r /C19
(35)
where this is only valid up to the point where the pressure in the
capacitor reaches equilibrium at the source pressure. The analyti-
cal solution for the dynamics of the fall response is
Pc;fall tðÞ ¼ Po
Ps
Po
þ t
4R
†
C /C0 4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ps
Po
/C0 1
r
þ t
R
†
C
 ! !
(36)
which is again only physically valid until the pressure in the
capacitor drops to equilibrium at the source pressure. We analyti-
cally compute the time to reach any given threshold pressure, P
s,
which gives a closed form expression for the rise and fall times
trise ¼ R
†
C asin 2Ps
Ps
/C0 1
/C18/C19
/C0 asin 2Po
Ps
/C0 1
/C18/C19/C18/C19
(37)
tfall ¼ R
†
C 2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃPo
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ps /C0 Po
p
/C0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Ps /C0 Po
p/C16/C17
(38)
and note that these are linear in both R
†
and C.
There are two immediate consequences of note with the com-
pressible model. First is the dependence on source pressure for the
time constant, which is not present in the linear RC model. The
second is that response time is faster for rise times (capacitor pres-
surizing) than it is for fall times (capacitor depressurizing), due to
the higher average pressure, and therefore higher average density
and mass ﬂow rate, during the rise than the fall. Another way to
explain the faster rise than fall times comes from examining the
compressible ﬂow versus pressure drop curves in Fig. 3(b). When
pressurizing the capacitor the pressure drop across the resistor is
tracing the low-pressure sweep curve because the high pressure is
ﬁxed at the source pressure, whereas when depressurizing the
capacitor it is tracing the high-pressure sweep curve because the
low pressure is ﬁxed at atmosphere. Because mass is conserved
between pressurizing and depressurizing a given capacitor, higher
ﬂow rates during pressurization lead to a faster dynamic response
on the rise.
5.2 Numerical Simulation. As models and circuits grow
more complex, the feasibility of solving for analytical solutions to
dynamic systems decreases, as demonstrated by our attempt to
combine even a single compressible ﬂow resistor with a linear
capacitor. Simulation can be used to validate complex analytical
solutions, and is a necessary tool for understanding system
responses that involve nonlinearities like choking or capacitor
material properties that lead to capacitance values that change
with pressure. Much of the simulation infrastructure already exists
for simulating ﬂuidic circuits due to the prevalence of electrical
circuit simulation tools, and we leverage the customizable nature
of the
SIMULINK SIMSCAPE toolbox to add in our own custom mod-
els. For example, a custom air resistor block includes if/else state-
ments based on the high and low pressure in each time-step to
dictate whether or not ﬂow is choked and thus which portion of
Eq. (13) is used in the following loop of the numerical solver.
5.3 Experimental Validation. To validate our models, we
built a response time test setup with a simple RC ﬂuidic circuit for
both air and water. An Enﬁeld (Trumbull, CT) LS-V05 s valve,
chosen for its high ﬂow rate and fast actuation time (2 ms), acts as
a 3-way valve between the source pressure and atmosphere to ﬁll
or drain a tube or cartridge capacitor through a Beswick (Green-
land, NH) oriﬁce resistor. A pressure sensor embedded in the
capacitor records the dynamic response at 1 kHz sample rate
through a National Instruments (Austin, TX) CompactRIO con-
troller. Figure 10 shows the experimental setup for the simplest
case of an oriﬁce resistor with a rigid capacitor. For each of seven
oriﬁce diameters (100, 180, 250, 410, 510, 760, and 1000
microns), seven capacitor sizes (0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 mL), and
seven source pressures (2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200 kPa gage) for a
total of 7
3 ¼ 343 combinations we ran ﬁve trials each of toggling
the RC circuit input between the high-pressure source and the low
pressure of atmosphere. The 0-mL capacitor was included to
Fig. 10 The experimental setup for response time tests with a
resistor, a rigid capacitor, and a high-speed electromechanical
valve
051001-8 / Vol. 143, MAY 2021 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

provide an idea of baseline capacitance of our test setup, which
we added to the models before comparing against our results.
The set of rise and fall responses generated for an example
resistor-capacitor combination at a range of source pressures is
shown in Fig. 11. This plot clearly shows response time increasing
with source pressure as well as the longer fall times than rise times
for a given pressure as predicted in the previous subsection. The
results compared to our analytical calculations using the adiabatic
capacitance model are shown in Fig. 12. While this plot shows the
scaling relationship to be quite accurate with a coefﬁcient of
determination of r
2 ¼ 0:983, the root-mean-square (RMS) error is
non-negligible at 16.5% for rise times and 11.1% for fall times. It
is possible this error occurs because the adiabatic assumptions
used in our capacitance model ignore heat transfer for the slower
dynamic response, or that our assumption of negligible parasitic
capacitance and resistance in the test setup was not perfectly
accurate.
To extend the RC model validation to deformable capacitance,
we added the linear spring capacitors downstream of the resistor
in parallel with the rigid capacitor, as shown in Fig. 13. We chose
a single oriﬁce to test with nine deformable and rigid capacitor
combinations from three rigid volumes (0, 5, and 10 mL) and the
three spring-loaded syringes from Sec. 4. The rigid capacitor pro-
vides the V
o component of Eq. (22) while the spring-loaded
syringe adds the Vm term.
We tested all nine combinations of the three deformable capaci-
tors in parallel with each of the three rigid volumes at each of the
same seven pressure levels tested for the rigid RC dynamic
experiments. We relied on our custom simulation blocks to com-
bine the deformable capacitor model with the pneumatic resist-
ance model into differential equations that can be solved
numerically to generate expected dynamic responses of the pres-
sure inside the capacitor. Figure 14 shows the comparison of our
experimentally measured rise and fall times to those generated by
our models in simulation. While the model still captures the trends
quite well with a coefﬁcient of determination of r
2 ¼ 0:956, the
RMS error increased relative to the rigid RC results to 19.4% for
rise times and 21.2% for fall times. Examining some of the raw
data show that this is likely due to dynamics added by friction or
Fig. 11 Response time tests run on a single resistor–capacitor
combination at a range of source pressures validate the
dependence of the model on source pressure as well as the fact
that rise times to pressurize a pneumatic capacitor are faster
than fall times to depressurize it. The example shown here is
for a 180 lm oriﬁce and a 16 mL rigid capacitor.
Fig. 12 Evaluation of the response time model for air by show-
ing actual response time as a function of modeled response
time. A perfect model ﬁt would have a unity slope with an inter-
cept at zero, shown by the black line.
Fig. 13 The experimental setup for response time tests with a
resistor, a spring-loaded capacitor, and a high-speed electro-
mechanical valve is used to validate the deformable capaci-
tance model in a dynamic circuit
Fig. 14 The response time data from the spring-loaded syringe
capacitors compared to the theoretical model simulations
shows an increase in error relative to the rigid response time
data, likely due to added dynamics from friction or mass in the
syringe that are not included in the model
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control MAY 2021, Vol. 143 / 051001-9
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

mass in the syringe that is not included in the model, which have
a more signiﬁcant effect at lower source pressures and faster
response times. When the friction or inertia is blocking the piston
motion, the volume, and therefore capacitance, of the container
will be smaller than modeled, resulting in a faster rise in pressure
than predicted by the model.
6 Tube Diameter Optimization
One example use for our RC models that may beneﬁt a wide
range of applications is to optimize the tube diameter that will
minimize the response time to ﬁll or drain a capacitive ﬂuidic like
a soft actuator when the actuator and the valve cannot be perfectly
colocated and thus require a length of tubing to connect them. A
tube that has a very large diameter will have minimal resistance to
ﬂow, but at the expense of a large amount of parasitic capacitance.
A tube with a very small diameter will add negligible capacitance
to the system, but at the expense of greatly increasing the ﬂow
resistance. This tradeoff is illustrated in Fig. 15. In this section,
we aim to demonstrate that the models developed and validated
on the simplest RC circuits in the previous sections still hold for
more complex circuits, even when some of the underlying
assumptions of the lumped-parameter models have to be
stretched.
While this is no longer the simple RC circuit shown in Fig. 1,
our custom simulation blocks allow numerical modeling of more
complex circuits for which the ODEs do not have analytical solu-
tions. While a tube cannot be perfectly modeled by an oriﬁce due
to viscous losses, the results in Sec. 3 give us conﬁdence that it is
a sufﬁcient approximation to perform an optimization. A second
challenge introduced by adding a tube to the model is that the
tube resistance and capacitance cannot be perfectly separated. The
air that ﬁlls the tube volume immediately at its entry only travels
through the resistance of the valve, whereas the air that ﬁlls the
volume at the far end of the tube must pass through both the valve
resistance and the full tube resistance. We can approximate this in
discrete circuit components by placing half of the tube capaci-
tance at each end of the tube resistance.
We experimentally validate this more complex RC model with
1 mm valve oriﬁce ( R
†
¼ 3:1 /C2 108 Pa/(kg/s)) connected to a
250 mm length tube at a range of diameters that leads to a 25 mL
rigid ﬂuidic capacitor ( Cadiabatic ¼ 2:3 /C2 10/C0 10 kg/Pa). We sweep
the tube diameter (and associated tube resistance and capacitance)
in simulation to ﬁnd that the response time is theoretically mini-
mized at a diameter of 2.5 mm, and then measure the actual
response time for each of the four commercially available poly-
vinyl chloride (PVC) tubing inner diameters within the range of
interest. The results in Fig. 16 show that despite the assumptions
we make about the circuit in order to use our lumped-parameter
resistance and capacitance models, the simulation correctly identi-
ﬁes the tube diameter that minimizes response time to pressurize
and depressurize the capacitor.
7 Conclusion
This paper examines the various forms of RC timing models
typically used in microﬂuidics then highlights the shortcomings of
applying linear models directly to the size scales and ﬂow rates
frequently seen in soft robotics and other pneumatic applications.
We emphasize the importance of inertial losses in any ﬂuidic
resistor that is not a straight, smooth pipe with low ﬂow rates and
use this as motivation to develop a lumped-parameter resistance
model from the ﬂuid mechanics of “minor” losses in duct ﬂow.
Experimental data show that our R
†
single parameter ﬁt accurately
captures the nonlinearities and pressure dependence associated
with compressible and turbulent ﬂow, including sharp geometry
changes like an oriﬁce plate and even through tubes with length-
to-diameter ratios signiﬁcantly smaller than those used to generate
Moody charts and viscous pipe ﬂow theory. We expand capaci-
tance models to capture compressible behavior not only for rigid
volumes with an isothermal assumption, but also for deformable
volumes and adiabatic conditions that are more likely to deﬁne
fast dynamic ﬂuidic circuits. We combine our lumped-parameter
pneumatic resistance and capacitance components into a simple
dynamic RC circuit and experimentally validate the timing mod-
els by measuring the time required to pressurize and depressurize
Fig. 15 When pressurizing and depressurizing a ﬂuidic capacitor with an electromechanical
valve of known oriﬁce size through a tube of a speciﬁed length, choosing a tube with larger than
optimal diameter (left) will add a large amount of capacitance while a tube with smaller than opti-
mal diameter (right) will add a large amount of parasitic resistance. The RC models presented in
this paper allow for the selection of the optimal tubing diameter to minimize the response time
to pressurize and depressurize the capacitor.
Fig. 16 A simulated sweep of tube diameters for pressurizing
and depressurizing a 25 mL ﬂuidic capacitor through a 1 mm
oriﬁce and a 0.25 m length tube shows an optimal tube diameter
of 2.5 mm. While the experimental data do not perfectly ﬁt the
simulation of this multicomponent RC circuit, it does show that
the optimization led to the correct tubing diameter selection to
minimize response time.
051001-10 / Vol. 143, MAY 2021 Transactions of the ASME
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026

a wide range of rigid and deformable capacitors through a range
of oriﬁce resistors at a variety of source pressures. Finally, we
demonstrate that the utility of these models extends to nonideal-
ized ﬂuidic circuits by combining them as building blocks to opti-
mize a tube diameter to minimize response time. This work builds
a set of lumped-parameter modeling primitives that can then gen-
eralize to the growing need for ﬂuidic control applications in the
future.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Bobby Manson and John Walczak for their
work in building the ﬂuidic test bench used in the experiments,
Erik Roby for building the capacitors used to validate the capaci-
tance models, and Deborah Hutchinson for help reviewing the ﬂu-
idic timing models literature.
Nomenclature
A ¼ area (m2)
c ¼ speciﬁc heat (J/(K-kg))
C ¼ ﬂuidic capacitance (kg/Pa)
_E ¼ rate of change of internal energy (J/s)
g ¼ acceleration due to gravity (m/s 2)
k ¼ stiffness (N/m)
K ¼ loss coefﬁcient
m ¼ mass (kg)
_m ¼ mass ﬂow rate (kg/s)
P ¼ pressure (Pa)
_Q ¼ rate of work done (J/s)
R ¼ ﬂuidic resistance (Pa /C1 s/kg)
t ¼ time (s)
T ¼ temperature (K)
U ¼ average velocity (m/s)
V ¼ volume (m3)
_W ¼ rate of heat transfer (J/s)
x ¼ displacement (m)
Y ¼ compressibility correction factor
z ¼ height (m)
c ¼ ratio of speciﬁc heats (unitless)
q ¼ density (kg/m3)
s ¼ time constant (s)
References
[1] Gluskin, R., Jacoby, M., and Reader, T., 1964, “Flodac: A Pure Fluid Digital
Computer,” Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference, San Francisco,
CA, Oct. 27–29, pp. 631–641.
[2] Thorsen, T., Maerkl, S. J., and Quake, S. R., 2002, “Microﬂuidic Large-Scale
Integration,” Science, 298(5593), pp. 580–584.
[3] Wehner, M., Truby, R. L., Fitzgerald, D. J., Mosadegh, B., Whitesides, G. M.,
Lewis, J. A., and Wood, R. J., 2016, “An Integrated Design and Fabrication
Strategy for Entirely Soft, Autonomous Robots,” Nature, 536(7617), pp.
451–455.
[4] Vasios, N., Gross, A. J., Soifer, S., Overvelde, J. T., and Bertoldi, K., 2020,
“Harnessing Viscous Flow to Simplify the Actuation of Fluidic Soft Robots,”
Soft Rob., 7(1), pp. 1–9.
[5] Preston, D. J., Jiang, H. J., Sanchez, V., Rothemund, P., Rawson, J., Nemitz, M.
P., Lee, W.-K., Suo, Z., Walsh, C. J., and Whitesides, G. M., 2019, “A Soft
Ring Oscillator,” Sci. Rob., 4(31), p. eaaw5496.
[6] Li, S.-S., and Cheng, C.-M., 2013, “Analogy Among Microﬂuidics, Microme-
chanics, and Microelectronics,” Lab Chip, 13(19), p. 3782.
[7] Perdigones, F., Luque, A., and Quero, J. M., 2014, “Correspondence Between
Electronics and Fluids in MEMS: Designing Microﬂuidic Systems Using Elec-
tronics,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. , 8(4), pp. 6–17.
[8] Duncan, P. N., Nguyen, T. V., and Hui, E. E., 2013, “Pneumatic Oscillator Cir-
cuits for Timing and Control of Integrated Microﬂuidics,” Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci., 110(45), pp. 18104–18109.
[9] Cartas-Ayala, M. A., and Karnik, R., 2014, “Time Limitations and Geometrical
Parameters in the Design of Microﬂuidic Comparators,” Microﬂuid. Nanoﬂuid.,
17(2), pp. 359–373.
[10] Weaver, J. A., Melin, J., Stark, D., Quake, S. R., and Horowitz, M. A., 2010,
“Static Control Logic for Microﬂuidic Devices Using Pressure-Gain Valves,”
Nat. Phys., 6(3), pp. 218–223.
[11] Schulte, T. H., Bardell, R. L., and Weigl, B. H., 2002, “Microﬂuidic Technolo-
gies in Clinical Diagnostics,” Clin. Chim. Acta , 321(1–2), pp. 1–10.
[12] Cousseau, P., Hirschi, R., Frehner, B., Gamper, S., and Maillefer, D., 2001,
“Improved Micro-Flow Regulator for Drug Delivery Systems,” 14th IEEE
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems In Technical
Digest (MEMS 2001), Interlaken, Switzerland, Jan. 25, pp. 527–530.
[13] Groisman, A., and Quake, S. R., 2004, “A Microﬂuidic Rectiﬁer: Anisotropic
Flow Resistance at Low Reynolds Numbers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. , 92(9),
p. 094501.
[14] Cristobal, G., Benoit, J.-P., Joanicot, M., and Ajdari, A., 2006, “Microﬂuidic
Bypass for Efﬁcient Passive Regulation of Droplet Trafﬁc at a Junction,” Appl.
Phys. Lett., 89(3), p. 034104.
[15] Vourdas, N., Moschou, D. C., Papadopoulos, K. A., Davazoglou, D., and Sta-
thopoulos, V. N., 2018, “A New Microﬂuidic Pressure-Controlled Field Effect
Transistor (pFET) in Digital Fluidic Switch Operation Mode,” Microelectron.
Eng., 190, pp. 28–32.
[16] Squires, T. M., and Quake, S. R., 2005, “Microﬂuidics: Fluid Physics at the
Nanoliter Scale,” Rev. Mod. Phys. , 77(3), pp. 977–1026.
[17] Russomanno, A., Gillespie, R. B., O’Modhrain, S., and Barber, J., 2014, Model-
ing Pneumatic Actuators for a Refreshable Tactile Display , Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, pp. 385–393.
[18] Kim, Y., Kuczenski, B., LeDuc, P. R., and Messner, W. C., 2009, “Modulation
of Fluidic Resistance and Capacitance for Long-Term, High-Speed Feedback
Control of a Microﬂuidic Interface,” Lab Chip, 9(17), p. 2603.
[19] Leslie, D. C., Easley, C. J., Seker, E., Karlinsey, J. M., Utz, M., Begley, M.
R., and Landers, J. P., 2009, “Frequency-Speciﬁc Flow Control in Microﬂui-
dic Circuits With Passive Elastomeric Features,” Nat. Phys. , 5(3), pp.
231–235.
[20] Mosadegh, B., Kuo, C.-H., Tung, Y.-C., Torisawa, Y.-S., Bersano-Begey, T.,
Tavana, H., and Takayama, S., 2010, “Integrated Elastomeric Components for
Autonomous Regulation of Sequential and Oscillatory Flow Switching in
Microﬂuidic Devices,” Nat. Phys., 6(6), pp. 433–437.
[21] Bourouina, T., and Grandchamp, J.-P., 1996, “Modeling Micropumps With
Electrical Equivalent Networks,” J. Micromech. Microeng. , 6(4), pp. 398–404.
[22] White, F. M., 1994, Fluid Mechanics, WCB/McGraw-Hill, Boston, MA.
Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control MAY 2021, Vol. 143 / 051001-11
Downloaded from asmedigitalcollection.​asme.​org/​dynamicsystems/​article-pdf/​143/​5/​051001/​6595715/​ds_143_05_051001.​pdf by Fudan University Library, li bai on 22 September 2026
