OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving 
Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ 
Ozgun Kilic Afsar1,2 Ali 2 2 2 2 Shtarbanov  Hila Mor  Ken Nakagaki  Jack Forman  
Karen Modrei Seung Hee Jeong 3  Klas Hjort 3  Kristina Höök1 Hiroshi Ishii2 
1 KTH 2 Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden 3  MIT Media Lab, USA  Uppsala University, Sweden 
{ozgunk,khook}@kth.se 
{ozgun,alims,hilamor,ken_n,jackform,ishii}@media.mit.edu 
{seunghee.jeong,klas.hjort}@angstrom.uu.se 
Figure 1: OmniFiber in use: (a) An assistive fexoskeleton for piano learning. (b) Patchbot. (c) A woven swatch with OmniFiber. 
(d) Finger-worn kinetic jewelry. (e) 30 meter OmniFiber spool. (f) Interactive corset inlay-knitted with OmniFiber. (g) Synchro-
nized spine tensegrities with active OmniFiber tendons. (h) FlowIO hardware. (i) Wearable sign language. (j) Heart-shaped 
dynamic ring. 
ABSTRACT 
Fiber – a primitive yet ubiquitous form of material – intertwines 
with our bodies and surroundings, from constructing our fbrous 
muscles that enable our movement, to forming fabrics that inti-
mately interface with our skin. In soft robotics and advanced mate-
rials science research, actuated fbers are gaining interest as thin, 
fexible materials that can morph in response to external stimuli. 
In this paper, we build on fuidic artifcial muscles research to de-
velop OmniFiber - a soft, line-based material system for designing 
movement-based interactions. We devised actuated thin (øout er 
< 1.8 mm) fuidic fbers with integrated soft sensors that exhibit 
perceivably strong forces, up to 19 N at 0.5 MPa, and a high speed of 
linear actuation peaking at 150mm/s. These allow to fexibly weave 
them into everyday tangible interactions; including on-body haptic 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8635-7/21/10. . . $15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474802 
devices for embodied learning, synchronized tangible interfaces 
for remote communication, and robotic crafting for expressivity. 
The design of such interactive capabilities is supported by Om-
niFiber’s design space, accessible fabrication pipeline, and a fuidic 
I/O control system to bring omni-functional fuidic fbers to the 
HCI toolbox of interactive morphing materials. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → User interface toolkits. 
KEYWORDS 
soft actuator, stretchable sensor, microfuidics, e-textiles, haptics, 
movement-based HCI 
ACM Reference Format: 
Ozgun Kilic Afsar, Ali Shtarbanov, Hila Mor, Ken Nakagaki, Jack Forman, 
Karen Modrei, Seung Hee Jeong Klas Hjort Kristina Höök, and Hiroshi Ishii. 
2021. OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement 
based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’. In The 34th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’21), October 
10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474802 
1010
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Thin linear forms are plain yet ubiquitous geometric building blocks 
found throughout nature. For example, most of peripheral neural 
cells are linear, branching out through the diferent parts of our 
bodies essential for our kinesthetic perception. Similarly, human 
skeletal muscle tissues are structured of bundles of fbrous muscle 
modules which help navigate our bodily movements and everyday 
voluntary control. When it comes to everyday objects and wear-
ables, we spend most of our lives in direct contact with fbers and 
yarns. Such linear forms are versatile and their afordances allow 
them to be structured into textiles, that are in close correspondence 
with our bodies and movements. 
Artifcial fber-based actuators (e.g. yarn/string/thread actuators), 
pioneered within the robotics community [17, 31, 36, 60, 61, 66, 67] 
are attracting increasing interest as a means to achieve seamless and 
high-granularity actuated on-body wearables and textile systems. 
In this paper, we introduce OmniFiber, a reconfgurable material 
system based on interactive fuidic fber 1 actuators (Figure 1). 
Omnifber goes beyond previous work in fuidic actuators by con-
sidering the needs and constraints of interaction designers, rooted 
in its design criteria, defned as ‘weavability, ’ ‘accessibility, ’ and 
‘actuation versatility’ (Figure 2a). For the fabrication, we developed 
an accessible pipeline that can be performed with of the shelf ma-
terials. This fabrication technique embeds the sensing component 
into the fber, allowing to use the strain tunability of the fbers to 
achieve a wide range of movement-based I/O. For output, Omnifber 
supports actuation versatility in terms of strength (weak to strong), 
speed (immediate to ambient), shape (straight to complex linear 
geometries) as in Figure 2b, and modularity. Omnifber is also skin 
safe, and compatible with common textile processing techniques 
-sewing, weaving, and machine knitting- due to its thin, pliable 
form and suitable surface friction. To support dissemination of 
the technique, we performed a preliminary characterization of the 
actuator elongation, bending and force output. This was used to 
create a minimalist mathematical model to aid designers’ actuator 
selection. The overarching goal of this work is to create a powerful 
platform for actuating fbers that empowers interaction designers 
and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) researchers. 
While a variety of such line-based tools for on-body and 
movement-based HCI research have been already explored, they 
had major drawbacks to be woven into the fabric of everyday life 
[76]. Due to their actuation methods, they have been either rigid 
and bulky [41, 43], exhibiting slow response speeds with a limited 
movement range [14], provide low actuation forces and relatively 
small usable strain while being unsuitable for direct skin contact 
[18, 38, 40]. OmniFiber combines multimodal haptic feedback such 
as lateral skin stretch, compression, textured, and high frequency 
vibration feedback within a single thin and compliant fuidic fber 
system, allowing for immediate response (axial displacement peak-
ing at 150 mm/s), high strain (up to 245%) and high force output 
(up to 19 N). 
To support designers, we outline a twofold design space; A) the 
primitive functionalities for designing morphing interfaces and 
movement-based interactions with OmniFiber, and B) 2D and 3D 
1In this paper, we use a less restrictive defnition of fber, as a fexible cylindrical body 
with high aspect ratio and a diameter in the range of hundreds of microns. 
fber compositions utilizing modularity and traditional fber struc-
turing techniques to demonstrate complex morphing and combined 
haptic feedback. For control, we utilize and expand upon FlowIO 
[63], a compact and portable pneumatic control platform, to avoid 
large air compressor systems that often limit mobility, and allow 
users to easily orchestrate the interactivity of OmniFiber-based 
devices on-the-fy. With our relatively accessible implementation, 
we envision our work to be adopted by a variety of interaction 
designers in the e-textiles community, as well as practitioners and 
academics in movement-based [22] somaesthetic [24], or wearable 
interactions. 
Figure 2: OmniFiber’s (a) Design Criteria and (b) versatile 
morphing states as a guide for interaction designers: b1) con-
traction (by 32%), b2) extension (by 245%), b3) bending, b4) 
coiling, b5) textured. 
In summary, OmniFiber’s key contribution lies in the merging 
of components and simultaneous properties, into a comprehensive 
fber-based system that: 
• combines closed-loop strain control, shape programmability, 
modularity, and miniaturization for seamless textile integra-
tion in a single package. These are popular afordances in 
HCI actuators research, but are novel for thin McKibbens; 
• presents an integrated fabrication pipeline for fber-
reinforced fuidic actuators that provides afordances of value 
to designing on-body interactions [49]; 
• opens a design space that covers single fber, 2D and 3D 
confgurations; 
• implements a FlowIO-based [63] control system with 
HW/SW add-ons, including high current circuit, high fow 
rate valve confguration, MUX sensor circuit, and Arduino 
library for multichannel strain control. 
While each of these properties may not be novel in itself, to-
gether they make OmniFiber uniquely ftted to the needs of inter-
action designers as will be demonstrated through a range of design 
cases, such as on-body haptic devices to support movement-based 
skill acquisition, synchronized tangible interfaces for remote com-
munication, and robotic crafting for expressivity. To the design 
1011
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
community, the functionality and aesthetics of the material is not 
measured solely in terms of what it looks like as it moves, but more 
importantly, what it feels like interacting with our skin, movements, 
and bodily engagements. Our vision for OmniFiber is to provide 
the experience of a second muscle that interacts with our dexterous 
muscles, enriching physical interactions. 
2 RELATED WORK 
Research in shape-changing and actuated Tangible User Interfaces 
(TUIs) have been explored for dynamic afordances, physical dis-
plays and movement-based interactions [10, 25, 59]. OmniFiber 
contributes to several streams of research in this efort -fuidic 
interfaces, reconfgurable modular toolkits, and soft fber-based 
actuator- to support movement-based interactions. 
2.1 Fluidic Interfaces 
In the past decade, soft interfaces utilizing fuid pressure for actu-
ation have gained interest within the HCI feld as organic, com-
pliant, and lightweight interfaces for visual and haptic feedback 
[12, 19, 35, 39, 46, 47, 50, 70, 73, 78, 85]. In the feld of soft robotics, 
pneumatic actuators are some of the most prevalent actuators due 
to their high power density, large deformations, accessible fabrica-
tion with of-the-shelf materials, and high bandwidth of actuation. 
These benefts have facilitated their dissemination to HCI for ap-
plications including haptic sleeves, full-body suits, and thin flm 
shape displays [12, 35, 85]. Among them, PneuSleeve [85] is one 
of the most relevant works to OmniFiber, where researchers in-
troduced a pneumatic forearm sleeve with a wide range of haptic 
expressions. The main diference is that OmniFiber is a deforma-
tion sensor integrated fber-form actuator, and can be knitted and 
woven into a rich swatch of fabric patterns resulting in unique actu-
ation modalities including out-of-plane bending, coiling and tactile 
micro textures. OmniFiber can also be sewn into other sheet sub-
strates, while PneuSleeve is an already-integrated sheet interface. 
Another advantage of using multiple fber actuators over a single 
sheet-form actuator is that if one or more of the fbers malfunction, 
the multi-fber sheet assembly still continues to work with little 
leakage. 
2.2 Reconfgurable Modular Toolkits and 
Morphing UIs for Movement-based Design 
A variety of hardware tools with/for morphing UIs have been pro-
posed in the HCI feld [20, 41, 43, 44, 46, 57, 65, 65, 84]. In many 
of these works, researchers have integrated motion sensing and 
actuation capability within one module, to propose a way that al-
lows users to program the motion by direct manipulation with their 
hands. This method of physical motion design is defned as ‘kinetic 
memory’ [57] or ‘programming by demonstration [11] / example 
[32]’ in HCI / HRI. 
Inspired by this research, we developed OmniFiber to be coupled 
with deformation sensing to allow kinetic memory function in 
addition to the software GUI of motion control. For example, in 
MorphIO [46] researchers introduced a modular pneumatic I/O 
hardware kit based on tentacle-like actuators embedded with an 
elastic sponge for strain sensing. Compared to MorphIO, OmniFiber 
ofers similar I/O capability in a form factor that is over ten times 
thinner (0.6 - 1.8 mm versus 1.6 cm in diameter) and with much 
higher resolution and versatility of a single module movement. 
Other motion design toolkits introduced fber-form factors with 
reconfgurability using SMAs [49, 53, 74, 84]. While these SMA 
actuators are often thinner than OmniFiber, they rely on sensing 
with an additional hardware which sacrifces the thinness of the 
fber. Our technique with airbrushing of soft stretchable conductive 
traces on the actuator substrate helps maintain the thinness while 
allowing deformation input at once. 
2.3 Soft Fiber-based Actuators in HCI 
Soft fber actuators have emerged as an area of interest in HCI as 
a means to package the rich interactivity of morphing line-based 
UIs [14, 40, 43, 75] in a lightweight and easily embedded (e.g. by 
sewing, knitting, weaving) manner. Among them, shape memory 
alloys (SMAs) are one of the most popular types adopted by HCI 
researchers for tactile interfaces, hair displays, paper craft, and 
curved surface prototyping [18, 48, 49, 51, 84]. While commonly 
used, SMAs have numerous drawbacks such as being potentially 
harmful to the human skin by overheating [13], requirement for a 
restorative force, arduous training process for reversible actuation 
[26], and being either too stif (thicker SMAs) or too delicate (thinner 
SMAs) which in turn afects the actuation speed [3]. Furthermore, 
they are characterized as ‘not easy to control’ in [55], exhibiting 
low accuracy, thermal hysteresis and very low efciency. 
Twisted and coiled actuators also yield low efciencies due to 
thermal processes underlying actuation that leads to excessive heat-
ing and rapid drainage of batteries when larger forces are needed 
[82]. Furthermore, inefcient passive cooling makes motion control 
slow and difcult [37]. Nevertheless, such actuators may have good 
use for passive actuation, where there is large variation in ambient 
temperature. In ModiFiber [14], the authors coated such twisted 
and coiled actuators in silicone, allowing for two-way morphing, 
but with no programmable out-of-plane behaviour. Although this 
actuator exhibits fast torsional actuation (≈6 s), its linear actuation 
speed is limited to 5% in 5 min, while extensible-type OmniFiber’s 
peak linear actuation speed is 70% in ≈1 s. ModiFiber also has rel-
atively small usable strain (5%), and overheats during actuation 
(80 ◦C) which prevents direct body contact. Additionally, for both 
SMAs and ModiFiber, power must be continuously supplied to keep 
the fbers actuated, resulting in lower power efciency compared to 
OmniFiber which can maintain its actuated state without drawing 
any power. 
Albaugh et. al [1] introduced a compelling method for embed-
ding cable tendons [4, 72] into fabric by computer-controlled weft 
knitting, allowing a variety of morphing behaviors that require 
motor control for interactivity, and reliable machine-knitting of 
delicate conductive yarns for embedded sensing. 
While such parallel research in HCI enables novel interactions us-
ing the form-factor of a single line, the integration of dynamic fuid 
properties to a thin, composite fber geometry remains unexplored. 
In the 2017 review paper, Designing Line-Based Shape-Changing 
Interfaces by Nakagaki et al. [42], it was discussed how the fuid-
actuated approach was mainly limited in size, mobility, and shape 
complexity. OmniFiber closes this gap by being developed with 
very thin, meters-long hollow elastic fbers (300 µm < øinner < 760 
µm) actuated by high pressure fuidics. While our design system 
is based on thin McKibben muscles [30] previous work is limited 
1012
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
to only simple axial contraction capability of the muscle fbers. 
These devices are actuation-focused and do not include closed-loop 
feedback control. [61] Furthermore, machine-knitting of higher 
hierarchical structures with thin McKibbens –likely incompatible 
thickness with standard knitting machines– or ModiFiber –due to 
limited continuous fber length– have not been implemented. 
Figure 3: Section A: (a) Multi-layered fber composite. (b) 
Two basic fber working mechanisms. (c) Temporal morph-
ing properties. (d) Multimodal haptic properties. 
3 OMNIFIBER DESIGN SPACE 
OmniFiber is a reconfgurable material system for movement-based 
interaction design, based on thin fuidic fber actuators with closed-
loop strain control. We explore how I/O capabilities and multimodal 
haptic feedback of thin fuidic fbers can be leveraged to develop 
novel tangible interactions. 
We defne a twofold design space of OmniFiber as the fundamen-
tal architecture of fuidic fber actuators, in which we describe how 
it can be composed for reconfgurable interactive functionalities. 
The design space consists of two main components; (A) Primitive 
Fiber Architecture, and (B) Modular Compositions and Fiber 
Structuring Techniques. 
3.1 (A) Primitive Fiber Architecture 
This section presents a hierarchical architecture of the fber 
anatomy. We illustrate our multi-layered fber (Figure 4a-b) that can 
exhibit one of the two types of basic mechanisms, and extending to 
a versatile set of morphing properties. 
Figure 4: Primitive Fiber Architecture: (a) A multi-layered, ø 
= 1.5 mm OmniFiber composite. (b) around the index fnger. 
(c) various diameter OmniFiber devices with varying tubing 
- braid properties (Supplementary Material 1). (d) ø = 0.6mm 
fber wrapped around the fnger. 
(a) Multilayer Fiber Composite: We devised fve construction 
primitives for the fabrication of the multilayered OmniFiber design 
with a diverse set of properties (Figure 3a). These properties allow 
for a range of design choices to achieve the primitive fber motions. 
(Figure 3b) Varying the parameters of the latter two construction 
primitives, namely the (a4) Interlocked Outer Mesh and (a5) Me-
chanical Constraint, efectively alters the morphing behaviour and 
haptic feedback properties as illustrated in Figure 3c-d. 
a1. Internal Fluid is the medium contained in the fber that dy-
namically fows when pressure is applied or removed. The internal 
fuid can be pressurized gas (i.e. air), liquid (i.e. water), conductive 
liquid metal, phase-changing low-melting point alloy (i.e. Gallium) 
or other specialized fuids such as a ferromagnetic fuid. The re-
ported systems that use liquids vary in operating pressures and 
actuation methods. [71, 77] For hydraulic operation, noisy and 
miniaturized diaphragm pumps can be replaced by piezoelectric 
micro pumps, thus making compact design possible for wearability 
comfort. 
a2. Elastomeric Micro Tubing. In this study, we use ethylene 
propylene diene monomer (EPDM) rubber and silicone elastomer 
micro-core tubing with properties detailed in Supplementary Ma-
terial 1. For applications requiring higher force outputs, tubing 
materials with high elastic modulus, such as soft EPDM rubber, 
are preferred. There is a variety of commercially available tubings 
(Figure 4c-d) with outer diameters below 2 mm and lengths up to 
100 m long. The internal structure of the tubing used in this study 
is cylindrical single lumen2    with a minimum diameter of 300 µm. 
2The cavity or channel within a tube. 
1013
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
a3. Sof and Stretchable Sensor. Sensing of user input is crucial 
for interactive applications which is why we designed a special 
sensor with a thin, tubular form-factor. We devised an accessible 
process using airbrush with conductive solution to fabricate highly 
stretchable (130%) and thin (100 µm) sensor channels that accom-
modate strains experienced by the human skin (55 to 75%) [62]. We 
used resistive sensing, where mechanical strain causes a change in 
electrical resistance, to detect deformation inputs like stretch and 
pressure for closed-loop control. 
a4. Interlocked Outer Mesh. Although this work mainly fo-
cuses on the efect of outer mesh interlocking technique on the 
actuation behaviour, it is also possible to utilize a wide diversity of 
yarns with varying mechanical properties, such as inherent yarn 
elasticity (detailed in Section 4.2). We detail the design and fabrica-
tion of two types of interlocked tubular outer mesh: braided (Figure 
5a) and knitted (Figure 5b). 
Braided mesh is the traditionally used method for sleeving 
McKibben actuators, where the actuation behaviour is afected by 
several parameters of the mesh such as braiding material, single 
strand length in the braid, braiding angle, braid diameter and ex-
pansion ratio. We studied a range of these parameters and their 
efect on the fber actuation detailed in Supplementary Material 1. 
Further, we devised an automated method to fabricate a theoret-
ically infnite (in our case 60 meters) length strand of OmniFiber by 
applying a tubular knitted mesh around the elastomeric tubing 
using the circular mode of our weft knitting machine as will be 
detailed in Section 4.2. Although we achieved only 12% contraction 
ratio with the knitted sheath, while still higher than NiTi (2-5%) 
and ModiFiber (5%), a 2016 work on knitted-sheath McKibbens [5] 
demonstrates up to 50% contraction which is far greater than what 
standard McKibben actuators (<40%) can achieve. Still, it should be 
noted when choosing an interlocking method, that knitted sleeving 
may be prone to higher hysteresis due to greater potential efect 
from friction between the sheath and elastomeric tubing. 
Figure 5: Macro view of interlocked outer mesh prototypes. 
(a) Of-the-shelf braided mesh: a1) copper silver, ø = 1.6 mm), 
a2) nylon, ø = 0.8 mm, a3) nylon, ø = 0.4 mm, a4) expanded di-
ameter at braid angle θ = 54.4◦ . (b) Machine-knitted tubular 
mesh: b1) elastic yarn, b2) cotton yarn, b3) polyester yarn, ø 
= 1.2 mm, b4) expanded diameter. 
(b) Basic Fiber Mechanisms: OmniFiber primitives are based 
on one of the two primitive fuid-driven muscle fbers; Contractible 
Muscle Fiber (McKibben) and its inverse counterpart Extensible Mus-
cle Fiber. The operation principle of both fbersis similar by nature; 
the inner elastomeric microtubule deforms in axial and radial direc-
tions under applied pressure, and this leads to a force output and 
displacement in the axial direction by altering the braid angle. The 
Contractible Muscle Fiber shortens in length when fuid is supplied 
to the actuator [64, 81] and produces strong linear forces in the 
pull direction. In contrast, the Extensible Muscle Fiber extends in 
response to the internal fuid pressure. 
The working principle of the basic primitives is characterized by 
the relationship between the internal tubing and the braided outer 
mesh. When the outer braiding angle, θ (Figure 5a4) is smaller than 
54.4◦, the fber contracts, and when it is larger than 54.4◦, it extends 
[33]. The extension and contraction limit of a fber is determined 
by the flaments in the braid no longer being able to slip past each 
other beyond the 54.4◦ angle state, as they are in direct contact. In 
order to design the primitive fber motion, one can pick a fber type 
to either prioritize force output or range of morphing behaviour. 
Figure 6: (a) Temporal morphing properties: a1) A strain 
limiting inextensible thread inserted parallel to the braided 
mesh axis for mechanical constraint. Temporal shape-
change from line to varying bending radii curves for, a2) 
contractible-bending fber, a3) extensible-coiling fber at 
pressures between 0kPa and 650 kPa. Both fber types are 
strain-limited with a single constraint along the actuator 
length. Multimodal haptic properties: (b) compression feed-
back with contractible OmniFiber on fnger. (c) OmniFiber 
sewn into a fabric piece for lateral skin stretch and vibra-
tion feedback on the larynx. 
a5. Mechanical Constraint. We extend the McKibben design’s 
simple contraction and extension motions by adding mechanical 
constraints on the interlocked outer mesh. The basic motion of the 
fbers can be mechanically programmed to bend at a certain angle 
or to ft arbitrary linear shapes. Mechanical Constraints are either 
added via an inlaid inelastic thread on the outer mesh (Figure 6a1), 
or by a 3D printed fexible constraint placed on the actuator. To 
1014
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
support the design of the constraint and the resulting curved shape, 
we developed an empirical model detailed in Section 6.2. 
Based on this core architecture, the rest of the design space 
section A presents the extended design primitives in two categories: 
morphing and haptic properties. 
(c) Morphing Properties: A wider space of expressive move-
ment behaviours can be utilized for interaction design to dy-
namically represent information in a tangible way, such as send-
ing tangible messages in morphing line forms, or for bottom-
up form-fnding practice based on a line geometry for design 
applications. 
By controlling the length, location, orientation, and number 
of mechanical constraint layers added on the basic OmniFiber 
anatomy, we can create a variety of geometrical shapes and move-
ments in a similar vein to hydrostatic skeletons in nature [69]. 
The fber then can be bent, folded, or coiled in multiple directions 
in order to achieve reversible targeted shapes in 3D, from a sin-
gle linear form. Each temporal state of the morphing fber can 
be maintained by keeping the control valve at the of state. We 
captured the temporal morphing of a similar length of extensible 
(Figure 6a2) and contractible type (Figure 6a3) two basic fber prim-
itives, patterned with a mechanical constraint layer along the full 
length of the actuator. We observed behaviours between 0 kPa 
and 600 kPa at increments of 50 kPa for both. The frst perceiv-
able shape deformation was observed at 80 kPa for both primi-
tives. While the extensible fber coils at maximum actuation due 
to the strain percentage being higher (245%) than that of the con-
tractible fber (32%) which only goes as far as closing a full circular 
shape. 
(d) Haptic Properties: As OmniFiber can be easily embedded 
into clothing, it makes a viable material for interaction designers 
to fabricate a variety of on-skin and on-body haptic sensations 
such as pulling, squeezing, poking, vibrating, and skin stretching 
(Figure 6b). Multiple haptic properties can be combined in a single 
OmniFiber device, such as on-fnger compression feedback (Figure 
6c) that can be actuated at high frequency to achieve vibration 
feedback simultaneously. 
In addition to the macro deformations like bending and coiling, 
small scale (øout er = 0.7mm) morphing can be achieved such as 
a textured surface for tactile feedback. (Figure 2e) This can be 
fabricated by knitting the outer mesh with sub-millimeter lace 
stitch patterns that creates holes for which the infated fexible 
tubing bulges through. 
Section A of the design space describes the fundamental archi-
tecture to construct OmniFiber for embodying targeted shapes, 
tunable morphing, and haptic properties. In Section B (Figure 7) we 
present assembled, embedded or structured Omnifber assemblies 
to achieve more complex interactivity. These multidimensional 
structures allow new utilities (e.g. out-of-plane haptic feedback), 
and to produce higher force (e.g. by weaving OmniFiber as weft) 
and strain (e.g. by inlay knitting OmniFiber) outputs. 
3.2 (B) Modular Compositions and Fiber 
Structuring Techniques 
This section presents two OmniFiber confguration types: (a) assem-
bling multiple fbers in modular and reconfgurable compositions 
Figure 7: Section B: (a) Modular fber compositions. (b) Fiber 
structuring techniques. 
(Figure 7a) and (b) the structuring a single continuous fber into 
fabric assemblies (Figure 7b). 
(a) Multi-fber Modular Compositions. The frst type of com-
position is the use of multiple fbers in 1D, 2D, and 3D compositions 
(Figure 8a-c). While a single OmniFiber is relatively easy to fab-
ricate, it has certain limitations (e.g. insufcient forces on certain 
body parts, relatively limited number of movement types). As a 
design guideline, to obtain larger forces one can freely increase 
the number of actuators in parallel or bundles [30]. Researchers 
have also shown that it is possible to achieve higher strain outputs 
by braiding the fbers in hierarchical confgurations [29]. Further-
more, the fbers can be arrayed in various confgurations to achieve 
omnidirectional actuation (Figure 7a:i-iv). An additional level of 
modularity can be achieved by composing reconfgurable multi-
fber modules. Such heterogeneous composition (Figure 7a:vi) can 
Figure 8: Modular fber compositions: (a) 1D linear. (b) 2D 
planar. (c) 3D wireframe. (d) heterogeneous assembly. 
1015
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
Figure 9: OmniFiber-based swatches with various fber structuring techniques: (a) Woven with a continuous ø = 0.9mm Om-
niFiber as weft. (b) Plain knitted and rib knitted ø = 0.9mm OmniFiber. (c) Inlay-knitted large fabric piece using 30 meter long 
ø = 1.5 mm OmniFiber. (d) Weft-knitted quasi-spacer fabric with active ø = 1.5 mm OmniFiber spacer layer. 
involve hybrid types of fber modules, (e.g. extensible, bending, 
helical) in one larger assembly (Figure 8d). 
Morphing and Haptic Properties. When multiple of the same 
functional fbers are arrayed (e.g. a planar array of extensible fbers) 
one can create in-plane bending motions by selectively actuating 
(e.g. 350kPa) or under-actuating (e.g. 80kPa) individual fbers. In 
a higher level composition with heterogeneous fber groups, one 
can achieve simple locomotion and morphing in 3D by sequentially 
actuating diferent muscle fber groups, as demonstrated by the 
’Patch-bots’ kit in Applications 5.3. 
A signifcant mechanical advantage of multi-fber compositions 
is the relatively higher output force production compared to a 
single fber composition. For example, while a single fber provides 
enough force to bend the human fnger, multi-fber compositions 
can support the movement of larger body parts [29]. 
(b) Fiber Structuring Techniques. While a single fber is lim-
ited to in-plane haptic feedback (e.g. compression, skin stretch), 
a 3D quasi-spacer fabric can exhibit out-of-plane haptic feedback 
pushing orthogonally towards the body. We present fber composi-
tions all of which are fabricated with traditional textile processing 
techniques on a 4.5mm standard gauge fatbed weft knitting ma-
chine (Silver Reed SK840 + SRP60 ribber). By using long (>10 m) 
active fbers (øout er = 0.9 mm) we exemplify weaving, plain, rib 
and inlay knitting (Figure 9a-c). As OmniFiber’s polyester outer 
mesh provides suitable friction for machine-knitting, these tech-
niques intend to demonstrate the scalability of OmniFiber to higher 
hierarchical structures. 
Morphing and Haptic Properties. We explored diferent tech-
niques to embed OmniFiber into a knitted structure and examined 
the resulting characteristics knit structures afect on the move-
ment of the fber and vice versa. The knit contains OmniFiber, 
that is inlaid within the fabric, therefore its constructed by two 
classes of fbers: one building the base structure and the other being 
activated. 
In Figure 9b, we demonstrate a rib knitted swatch constructed 
entirely of ø = 0.9 mm OmniFiber (with orange waste yarn), that 
changes stifness when pressurized. Such variable stifness fabric 
[9] can also be controlled locally by assembling separately knit-
ted samples that together form a fully functioning wearable that 
partially stifens when necessary and softens when mobility is re-
quired. Alternatively, one can use a phase-changing working liquid 
[6, 52] such as Gallium or other low-melting-point alloy (Figure 
10d), actuated at liquid state using a piezoelectric liquid micro pump 
(200L/h) as in Figure 8d, and shape-lock in 2 hours at slightly lower 
than room temperature (20◦C). This property can be utilized more 
efciently with an active cooling system. 
Figure 9c demonstrates a large scale machine-knitted functional 
fabric by horizontally inlaying OmniFiber between the two beds 
at every other course in a serpentine trajectory. Additionally, we 
devised a method to fabricate a 3D quasi-spacer fabric (Figure 9d) 
on the same weft knitting machine by pleating-and-knitting the 
inlay-knitted fabric in place (Supplementary Material 6). The active 
’spacer’ layer is entirely made of a contractible-type OmniFiber, 
resulting in out-of-plane haptic feedback once actuated (Figure 
10f). As 2D fabrics are often limited to in-plane feedback such as 
stretching, our 3D knitting technique allows a novel out-of plane 
feedback mechanism in textile structures. This opens a new set of 
haptic properties for actuated textiles, enabling design with force 
feedback orthogonal to the body. 
Figure 10: A rich in-fabric actuation palette demonstrat-
ing states from unactuated to actuated. (a) inlay-knitted 
contractible-bending swatch. (b) stifness changing hand-
knitted collar. (c) inlay-knitted extensible swatch. (d) inlay-
knitted Gallium-flled fber for shape locking. (e) inlay-
knitted contractible-twisting swatch. (f) 3D knitted quasi-
spacer for out-of-plane feedback. 
1016
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
Figure 11: System architecture diagram. 
4 OMNIFIBER IMPLEMENTATION 
4.1 System Architecture 
The overall design of our system consists of the following compo-
nents: a fexible and stretchable fber-based modular interface, a 
pneumatic development platform FlowIO, with web-based GUI, and 
a multi-channel, multiplexed analog input for closed-loop strain 
control (Figure 11). 
Our system control is built on FlowIO [63], a miniature integrated 
fuidics control platform with fve pneumatic ports. We extended 
the FlowIO hardware and software to ft the following requirements 
of our system: (1) yielding high pressures (up to 350kPa), (2) an aux-
iliary multichannel sensor circuit for closed-loop strain control, (3) 
allowing real-time or planned “task scheduler” on the Web GUI, (4) 
communication between multiple devices for bidirectional interac-
tion (Supplementary Material 4). In FlowIO, we use a serial infation 
confguration of two miniaturized diaphragm pumps (Sparkfun, 
Airpo D2028 Vacuum Pump) yielding higher pressures to actuate 
multiple long (≈1 m) fbers at once. For a fber to maintain its actu-
ated state, power doesn’t need to be continuously supplied as the 
valves have a normally-closed state when of. The Web GUI simul-
taneously connects via Web-BLE to multiple FlowIO devices, and 
is able to communicate bidirectionally. We use the FlowIO web app 
running in Chrome to receive the multichannel strain data from the 
16-pin analog input module based on tangible deformation input by 
an OmniFiber device, process it in real-time, and control the output 
pressure (in the same OmniFiber device, or a paired second device) 
based on this data. 
Figure 12: Multi-step fabrication pipeline of OmniFiber. 
4.2 Multilayer Fabrication Pipeline 
In this section, we overview the design and fabrication pipeline 
for OmniFiber (Figure 12). The fabrication pipeline starts with rela-
tively accessible methods to ensure replicability of material science 
outputs by designers, such as the fabrication of stretchable sensor 
channels. This is followed by the assembly of the fber composite 
with the outer mesh, adding mechanical constraints, and fnalized 
with manual sealing, and wiring of the fber for control. 
Step 1: 3D Printing Mask and Pneumatic Adapters. To ap-
ply multi-channel conductive traces on the tubing, we 3D printed 
a 2-part mask from with ABS flament. The mask design has 4 U-
shaped channels (Figure 13a1), allowing for the wiring to be fxed 
at the fber ends, as well as indents for the pneumatic adapters to 
be tightly ftted during spraying. Finally, prior to sensor fabrication, 
we inserted the 3D printed pneumatic adapters on both ends of the 
tubing (Supplementary Material 3). 
Figure 13: Step 2: Multi-step CB-based stretchable sensor 
fabrication. (a) Mask preparation: placing the tubing in the 
mask and clamping with screws. (b) CB powder-silicone so-
lution preparation. (c) Mixing and pouring for spraying. (d) 
Applying airbrush at 15cm distance from the mask, and cur-
ing on 3D printer hot bed. 
Step 2: Sensor Preparation. We employed a spray deposition 
method of a carbon black nanopowders-elastomer composite to pat-
tern multi-channel strain sensors on the elastomeric micro-tubing. 
Our custom designed mask allows fabricating 0.1 mm wide conduc-
tive traces on the tubular surface. The following multi-step sensor 
fabrication process (Figure 13) can be adopted for a larger number 
of channels as well as more complex geometries. 
A sprayable solution was prepared by mixing CB nanopowders 
(Ketjenblack EC-300J, HM ROYAL) and elastomer liquids (Ecofex 
00-30, Smooth-on, Inc.) with a solvent (Novocs Gloss, Smooth-on, 
Inc.) to decrease the viscosity of the CB-elastomer mixture. The CB 
powder (0.15 g) was frst sonicated (RS PRO Ultrasonic Cleaner) in 
1017
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
Novocs solvent (15 g) for 15 minutes (Figure 13b). Then, Ecofex 
part A (1.5 g) was added and mixed manually for 5 minutes. Finally, 
Ecofex part B (1.5 g) was added to the solution and mixed on a 
mini vortex mixer (Four E’s) for one minute (Figure 13c). Before 
spraying, 3D printed tubing connectors were inserted into both 
ends of the tubing. A 3D printed mask covered the tubing while 
spraying with an airbrush at 30 psi for 25 iterations to achieve 
the starting resistance of 1 MOhm for each sensor channel (Figure 
13d). After curing the sprayed sensor patterns for 20 minutes on 
the 3D printer’s hot bed (or one hour at ambient temperature), we 
consecutively sprayed two layers of Ecofex part A + Novocs and 
Ecofex part B + Novocs solutions as a protective coating layer for 
the sensor channels. 
Figure 14: (a) 4-channel CB-based resistive strain sensor. (b) 
resistance values as 1,3MOhm at 0% and 3,2MOhm at 75% 
strain. (c) bending curvature principle diagram for an exam-
ple double-bend deformation. 
With this method, we patterned 4-channel strain gauge on each 
fber module (Figure 14a) to allow for detecting radii and direction 
of curvature by comparing the strain-resistance values across recip-
rocal electrodes (Figure 14b-c). While our native approach leverages 
resistive sensing, the embedded fuid pressure sensor in FlowIO can 
also be utilized for closed-loop feedback control. 
Figure 15: Step 3: Basic fber assembly. (a) Knitting tubular 
mesh around elastomeric tubing on a weft-knitting machine 
for scaled fber fabrication. (b) Contractible-type fber fabri-
cation. (c) Extensible-type fber fabrication. 
Step
 3: Basic Fiber Assembly. Once the sensor channels are 
completely cured, we insert the tubing inside the tubular mesh. 
Meshing with tubular knit. We devised an automated method to 
fabricate a theoretically infnite (in our case 60 meters) length strand 
of OmniFiber by knitting a tubular mesh around the elastomeric 
tubing on a single bed of our weft knitting machine (Supplementary 
Material 6). Such interlocking technique allows a wider design space 
by varying the properties of the tubular knit (e.g. diameter, stitch 
size and yarn characteristics) to program OmniFiber’s movement 
in a single-step fabrication (Figure 15a). 
Meshing with tubular braid. We used a commercially available 
braided nylon monoflament (Durometer 50A) with; diameters of 
0.8 and 1.6 mm, initial braiding angle of 18◦, and respective braid 
counts of 24 and 32. 
a. Contractible-type Fiber. The contractible-type fber can be fab-
ricated at any length, by inserting a similar length of elastomeric 
tubing in a tubular braided mesh of braiding angle smaller than 
54.4◦ (Figure 15b). 
b. Extensible-type Fiber. The extensible fber consists of identical 
materials as the contractible fber, except the mesh should be con-
siderably longer (x4 in our example). To achieve larger strains, the 
tubular braid is compressed into pleats using the following steps in 
Figure 15c. First, we insert a metal rod of the expanded diameter 
into the braided mesh as a mandrel. Then, we compress the mesh 
in the axial direction to create even pleats and fx both ends with a 
heat resistant nylon cable tie to maintain the pleated length. Finally, 
we heat the mesh either using a heat gun or oven for the structure 
to memorize the pleated shape, at a temperature lower than the 
melting point of the mesh material. Since the mesh is axially much 
longer, this allows the inner tubing to elongate until the braid angle 
reaches the 54.4◦ locking angle state. With this composition, we 
achieved strains from 70% up to a maximum of 245%. 
Figure 16: Step 4: Adding mechanical constraint. (a) bending 
curvature model based on braiding angle as a variable. (b) 
inextensible thread insert on extensible fber. (c) 3D printed 
constraint on contractible fber, a 1D modular assembly of 
two OmniFiber devices. (d) multiple 3D printed constraints 
on contractible fber for multi-bend morphing. 
Step 4: Adding Mechanical Constraint. We present two tech-
niques of selective strain-limiting to mechanically program the 
morphing behaviour via; 1) a fxed inextensible thread insert (Fig-
ure 16b), and 2) a 3D-printed fexible constraint (Figure 16c). 
Depending on the fber mechanism type, the bending occurs 
in the direction of the constraint (extensible type) or opposite to 
it (contractible type). The length of the strain limiting segment 
1018
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
Figure 17: (a) Upper body garment for breathing guidance during singing, peristaltically controlled by FlowIO. (b) active corset 
lacing with OmniFiber. (c) corset front view with vertically inlaid fbers. (d) Horizontal inlay of OmniFiber and close-up view. 
(e) Modular corset on a professional singer’s torso: e1) front and side view, and unactuated - actuated compression states of e2) 
module 1, e3) module 2, e4) module 3. 
afects the bending radius of the actuator when actuated (Figure 
16a), while its position afects the bending direction with resulting 
in-plane, out-of-plane or multi-plane bending motions. 
(1) Inextensible Thread Insert. In this technique, we manually 
insert and fx an inextensible monoflament parallel to the braided 
mesh axis (Figure 16b). This causes the local mesh geometry where 
the insert is located to be constrained in strain for both contraction 
and elongation-type mechanisms. We used a low elastic modulus, 
cheap nylon monoflament (fshing line) to bypass the impact of 
stretchability of the monoflament on the resulting movement. The 
thickness (0.05 mm) and material of the flament chosen should be 
similar to the strands in the braided outer mesh to avoid potential 
failure such as a ripped mesh. 
(2) 3D Printed Constraint. The strain limiting section can be 
fabricated by 3D printing a thin fexible frame. We printed multiple 
linear constraints (0.2 mm thick, 0.8 mm wide) dispersed along the 
contractible type fber with a øout er = 1 mm. We used TPU-type 
non-brittle flaments on a low-cost FDM 3D printer (Figure 16d). 
The printed part is then inserted between the braided outer mesh 
and the tubing, in parallel to the fber axis. 
Step 5: Wiring and Sealing. Surface-insulated copper wires (38 
AWG, 3522, Adafruit) are connected to the sensor electrodes on both 
ends of the fber with a carbon conductive ink (Carbon Conductive 
Adhesive 502, EMS). To achieve stability at the connections we used 
silicone glue (DOWSIL 732, Dow Corning). Finally, for a robust 
end sealing and further avoid fuid leakage, we inserted a fexible 
miniature Polyolefn Plastic heat-shrink tubing (McMaster Carr) at 
the tube-ftting connection points. 
4.3 Closed-loop Strain Control and Web-GUI 
As a frst step, to achieve a simple strain mirroring, we start with the 
known relationships between the actuator ∆ length vs applied pres-
sure, and actuator ∆ length vs ∆ resistance. From these relationships, 
we devised a mathematical mapping between the strain-induced 
resistance change and pressure (Supplementary Material 5). When 
the user tangibly deforms (e.g. stretch) an input OmniFiber device 
(1), the strain sensors change their resistance, from which we com-
pute the deformed state. We then utilized our mapping algorithm 
between strain and pressure to determine what pressures need to 
be supplied to the output OmniFiber device (2) to exhibit a similar 
deformation behaviour (e.g. elongation) and vice versa. 
To obtain the resistance of the strain gauges in real-time, we use 
a 16-channel analog input expansion module of FlowIO [63], which 
contains multiplexers and voltage dividers with resistance values 
tailored specifcally for OmniFiber’s resistance profle (1 Mohm to 
17 Mohm). The strain sensor data is sampled continuously and a 
moving average is computed over the last 10 samples from each 
channel. The averaged data is then continuously sent via Bluetooth 
Low Energy (BLE) to a central device running the FlowIO App. The 
FlowIO App simultaneously connects to the two FlowIO devices via 
BLE. After it receives the strain data from an input FlowIO device 
(1), it processes according to our mapping algorithm between strain 
and pressure, and then actuates the corresponding pneumatic port 
of the output FlowIO device (2) to supply the pressure for achieving 
the desired motion. 
5 APPLICATIONS 
In this section, we demonstrate how the design space of OmniFiber 
can be used for functional interactive applications. We envision 
OmniFiber-based interfaces as on-skin, on-body and on-object ap-
plications, woven into our daily environments. 
5.1 OmniFiber Interfaces for Movement 
Learning Support 
We explored how OmniFiber can be used to embody ‘somatic tacit 
knowledge’ [21] in creative movement practices. With these appli-
cations, we envision OmniFiber as a tangible tool to support and 
augment the expressive somatic vocabulary of the user. 
Upper body garment as diaphragm breathing guidance for 
vocal training. Controlled breathing is fundamental to profes-
sional singing: muscle movements in the singer’s torso allows for 
sensing of the diferent breathing patterns while singing. Such need 
for communicating the felt, non-verbal experience of breathing 
methods between a vocal trainer and trainee is highly relevant, 
both for in-person and remote settings. 
Working closely with a classically trained singer, we designed an 
interactive singing corset (Figure 17a) as a haptic guide to grasp the 
felt experience of diaphragm breathing for a novice vocal trainee. 
The garment design consists of three modules that simulate a peri-
staltic breathing movement on the wearer’s body (Figure 17e) by a 
sequential pressurize (450 kPa) and exhaust (0 kPa) task scheduling. 
1019
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
For each module, we used ø = 1.5 mm, 10 m long contractible-type 
fbers with high elastic modulus EPDM tubing to achieve local-
ized compression feedback by horizontal inlaying (Figure 17d), and 
lateral skin stretch by vertically inlaying OmniFibers (Figure 17c). 
Uniform compression pressures of 1.2 - 6.5 kPa is achieved, allowing 
a range for light to stronger compression on the torso [56]. Fur-
thermore, the garment’s ft can be dynamically customized to the 
wearer’s body by actuating a single continuous OmniFiber lacing 
of ø = 1.8 mm at the back of the corset (Figure 17b). 
Asynchronous Exo-muscles to Support Learning Musical 
Expression. During the training process on a musical instrument 
for novice players, the tangible haptic guidance of an exo-muscle 
device can allow the practice of polyrhythmic3 musical expression. 
We designed a system controlled by two FlowIO devices (Figure 
18a,b), programmed to purposefully disrupt the synchrony between 
the two hands of the player (Figure 18b). 
Figure 18: (a) OmniFiber-embedded "skill gloves" for prac-
ticing polyrhythmic expression in piano, controlled by two 
FlowIO devices that communicate via BLE. (b) Two hands 
playing diferent beat rhythms. (c) OmniFiber seamlessly 
sewn into the performance glove. 
While previous research explored soft exoskeletons using pneu-
matic actuators [66, 67, 79], in this example we utilize a ø = 1.5 
mm contractible fber attached to the anterior (Figure 18a) of each 
fnger in a tight-ftting glove, that produces a maximum tensile 
strength of ≈16 N at 600 kPa. The posterior of fnger sections are 
also woven ø = 2 mm extensible-type fbers (Figure 18c) to augment 
consecutive fexion-extension motion at switching frequencies of 
3Polyrhythm is the simultaneous use of two or more rhythms that are not readily 
perceived as deriving from one another, or as simple manifestations of the same meter. 
10 Hz for each fnger’s keystroke, and generate forces up to 8 N at 
the fngertip [54]. 
OmniFiber-based Spine Tensegrity to Reflect Body Move-
ment. Awareness to one’s spine posture and movements during an 
activity – from static posture to dynamic dance practice – signif-
cantly afects one’s movement skills. However, as the vertebrae are 
internal to the body, their posture during such activities is often 
covert. 
We designed two devices; (1) An orange ‘body worn tensegrity 
device’ that functions as a deformation sensor-only, while the (2) 
black ‘standalone tensegrity model’ is actuated based on this sensor 
data mapped from the body worn device (Figure 19a). The body 
worn device consists of rigid 3D printed vertebrae, a laser-cut rub-
ber lattice as a passive tendon, and fve ø = 0.9 mm strain sensing 
layer of OmniFiber to capture the multi-DoF deformation of the 
wearer’s spine in real time. The standalone model has fve individu-
ally controlled contractible-type ø = 1.5 mm, 60 cm long OmniFiber 
modules with a maximum 27% contraction ratio, functioning as ac-
tive tendons to playback the movements of the wearer’s spine. We 
achieved a maximum displacement of 16 cm when all fve modules 
are simultaneously actuated, sufcient for the displacement require-
ments of the human spine during a dance practice. We envision the 
tangible playback of the standalone model to aid in communicating 
small adjustments to a dancer’s movement in learning contexts. 
Figure 19: (a) Standalone model and body worn tensegrity 
design. (b) Body worn tensegrity on dancer’s body: b1) unde-
formed and b2) deformed states. Tangible record & playback: 
(c1) capturing spine movement with body worn tensegrity, 
(c2) replaying and observing on the standalone model. 
1020
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
5.2 Tangible Interfaces for Remote 
Communication 
Remote Communication by Tangible Sign Language. Re-
searchers previously developed sign language to speech translation 
[83], however, while spoken language enables expression through 
rhythm and intonation, the rich tangible expressions in sign lan-
guage computationally mediated by haptics remains underexplored 
within HCI research. OmniFiber devices attached onto users fngers 
can remotely mediate the sign-based communication by adding 
haptic feedback to it, leveraging dimensions such as intensity, pace 
and rhythm, as supporting haptic vocabulary (Figure 20a). 
Figure 20: (a) Haptics-mediated sign language by record & 
playback of fnger motions. (b) An OmniFiber-based ring 
morphing into an iconic heart shape as a tangible message. 
On-b
ody Tangible Notifcations. A wearable OmniFiber ring 
or bracelet can receive and convey information tangibly by dynami-
cally moving and changing its shape. We implemented a linear ring 
made from a ø = 1.5 mm contractible fber with three mechanical 
constraints. The constraints are designed and located to morph the 
ring into an iconic heart shape, to notify when a message from a 
loved one is received (Figure 20b). 
5.3 Robotic Cables, Tendons and Threads 
Finger-worn Kinetic Jewelry. We demonstrate how on-body dy-
namic and expressive appearance can be achieved with OmniFiber-
actuated kinetic jewelry [27]. We designed a fnger-worn device 
resembling a fapping magpie bird, actuated by iterative pressure-
release of a 2-ply extensible-type OmniFiber device. These thin 
devices functioning as active tendons, enable the integration of 
morphing materials into the delicate aesthetics of jewelry (Figure 
21a). 
Bio-inspired Robotics for Expression and Play. Inspired by 
natural structures that can perform complex movements [69], we 
fabricated a toy monkey with an active tail (Figure 21b1) made of 
an extensible strain-limited OmniFiber, demonstrating a playful 
coiling actuation (Figure 21b2). The tail is robust enough to pick up 
small objects (Figure 21b3) and carry the toy’s own weight (Figure 
21b4). 
Movement Sequence Learning with Patch-bots kit. Utilizing 
multi-fber confgurations in our design space, we designed a modu-
lar kit of OmniFiber patches, which we call ’Patch-bots’, capable of 
simple inchworm locomotion (Figure 21c). It consists of three mod-
ules; an array of extensible fbers forming the body, and two pairs of 
mechanically constrained extensible limbs for gripping capability. 
Users can learn assembly and locomotion control by sequentially 
actuating the separate modules connected to FlowIO, and using 
the WebGUI task scheduler to choreograph the locomotion (Figure 
21c2). 
Figure 21: (a) Finger-worn expressive kinetic ’magpie’ jew-
elry actuated by 2-ply contractible-type OmniFiber. (b) A toy 
monkey with a coiling type robotic tail that can b3) pick up 
or b4) wrap around objects. (c) Patchbot Kit, a heterogeneous 
modular assembly robot with 2D OmniFiber arrays that can: 
c3) extend its body and c4) bend its limbs for locomotion. 
6 TECHNICAL EV ALUATION 
6.1 Sensor Characterization 
Resistance changes of the fabricated sensor were monitored under 
tensile strains at 18 mm/sec. up to 130% strain by 10 iterations. As 
shown in (Figure 22a), a small hysteresis was observed, which is 
induced by percolation network changes of the conductive com-
posites. The repeatability of resistance changes of the sensor was 
obtained. 
6.2 Actuator Mechanical Tests 
Based on our experiments, OmniFiber may be operated at varying 
pressures yielding diferent strain and force outputs. As contractible-
type muscle fbers have already been characterized in detail by pre-
vious work [30], in this section we mainly present our experimental 
and analytical fndings for displacement and geometry change in 
extensible-type fbers. 
1021
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
For the elongation experiment setup, we used actuators made 
with silicone tubing ( ø=1.6 mm, Silastic), 1/16" diameter braid with 
a braid count of 32 and initial braiding angle of 18◦. 
Axial Displacement Testing: Our aim in establishing a design 
space of thin fuidic fbers is to allow designers to have adequate 
fexibility to capture any desired behaviour for a variety of appli-
cations. Although we take the initial length of the actuator as the 
only variable, we provide a parsimonious model4 based on our 
experimental data (Supplementary Material 2). 
We ran axial experiments with four diferent lengths of 
extensible fbers; 50, 100, 150, and 200 mm. In our setting, the fbers 
have three distinct actuation states (Figure 22b): 
State 0: Air flls in the tubing (no geometric change, just volume) 
State 1: Unconstrained expansion and extension of the tubing until 
it touches the outer mesh radially (convex) 
State 2: Constrained extension only - Now the tubing is constrained 
both radially and axially, which in turn results in change in the 
outer braid angle (down to 54.4 ◦ balance point). In this state the 
tubing cannot expand radially anymore, thus only elongation is 
observed which has a concave behaviour. 
Figure 22: (a) Resistive sensor profle; resistance-strain and 
resistance-time. (b) Experimental data plotting for 4 difer-
ent initial lengths of extensible muscle fber: 50, 100, 150, 200 
mm. (c) Elongation model curve ftting for all initial lengths. 
Empirical
 Elongation Model: As stated above, each fber has 
two distinct actuated states (State 1 & 2) with diferent constraints 
on its behavior. Let’s denote the actual behavior of the fber in State 
1 and State 2 by f1 : P × L → L and f2 : P × L → L, respectively, 
where P = [0, 600] is the set of pressure levels, and L = [0, ∞) is 
the set of length levels. 
4Parsimonious models explain data with a minimum number of parameters, or predic-
tor variables. 
Below is our parsimonious model of the actual behavior, fˆ: L × 
P → L, where each component of the piece-wise function corre-
sponds to the respective states. Note that the model has no exoge-
nous parameters, apart from the pressure and the initial length: 
2 3
(
l0 + 5 · 10−4p + 3 · 10−5p p ∈[0 , ϕ(l0))fˆ(p; l0) = �p  �  f1(ϕ(l0)) + 2 p − ϕ(l0) + γl0 p − ϕ(l0) p ∈[ ϕ(l0), 600]
(1) 
2where ϕ(l0) = 80+ 15 (l0 −50) is the "state-changing" pressure in kPa 
for the fber with initial length l0, and thus, f1(ϕ(l0)) is the "state-
changing" length of the fber with the initial length l0 under pressure 
ϕ(l0), and γ (l0) = −0.05 + 1.8 · 10−3l0 + 1.4 · 10−4l0
2 + 2.66 · 10−8l3 
0
is the coefcient of the linear term of the fber in its second state 
with the initial length l0. 
Our model is plotted and compared with the empirical results 
as shown below, demonstrating a good match for all four lengths. 
(Figure 22c) While this is not a fnal generalized model, it is a 
relatively useful model that allows designers to get a general idea of 
the actuation behavior before physical fabrication. Currently, our 
empirical data only has the initial length and applied pressure as 
variables, although we believe that the current parsimonious model 
will accommodate additional variables without signifcant change 
to the model. 
Radial Bending: We conducted bending tests to verify our as-
sumption regarding the relationship between mechanical constraint 
parameters-bending radius and pressure-bending radius. Our over-
all assumption is based on the observation that the mechanical 
constraint, whether on a contractible or extensible fber, will com-
pletely limit the movement of the applied part, and there will be 
no length change in the constrained area. This, in efect, causes 
a bending behaviour due to the resulting diference in length on 
reciprocal sides of the fber upon pressurization. 
As we already have the elongation model, using the length of an 
arc formula we can calculate the bending radii of the fber, α at any 
given pressure. 
LP − L0α = (2)D 
where LP is the length of the unconstrained, thus elongated, side 
at pressure P, L0 is the length of the constrained side of the fber, 
and D is the diameter of the fber. Moreover, the inner bending 
radius, the perpendicular distance between the center of bending 
and constrained side of the fber, is given by r0 = L0 , and likewise α 
the outer bending radius by rP = LP .α 
Axial Force Testing: The contraction force of a single fber is 
dependent on the actuator diameter, and increases with pressure 
in an approximately linear relationship. Since our fuid-actuated 
fbers are signifcantly thinner than the previously reported thin 
McKibbens, we conducted a Contraction % - Contraction Force, 
and Pressure - Contraction Force test with our contractible fber 
actuators (Supplementary Material 2). For the test setup, we used an 
HLB manual test stand with and an analog force gauge (Baoshishan 
100lb. Push-pull force gauge), an external compressor and pressure 
regulator to measure the force and amount of contraction. 
1022
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
We varied the supplied pressure at increments of 100 kPa, from 
100 kPa up to 600 kPa, where the maximum contraction ratio ob-
tained from the vertical displacement guide is 32% and force pro-
duction under 600 kPa is 8.8 N with the ø=0.9 mm, 53A fber con-
fguration in Supplementary Material 1, index 16. 
7 LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION 
This section details limitations and future directions of OmniFiber. 
7.1 Automated Fabrication Pipeline 
In our current fabrication pipeline of a single OmniFiber, multiple 
steps rely on manual processes (i.e., assembly, wiring, and coating) 
that are intensive, although quite reliable. When scaling the fabri-
cation to a large number of fbers, the process would beneft from 
further automatization. A promising technology for automating 
OmniFiber fabrication would be leveraging multi-material 3D print-
ing, to fabricate a conductive core and the interlocked mesh layer 
controlling localized fexible properties, [15, 58]. To fabricate longer 
strands of OmniFiber for textile applications, recent thermal fber 
drawing methods can be leveraged [28]. 
7.2 Toolkit Evaluation, Design and Simulation 
Tool 
Though we have not yet done any formal evaluations, we provided 
an OmniFiber toolkit to three professional textile designers to as-
sess the prototyping processes of robotic textiles using OmniFiber, 
over the course of 4 weeks. Although working with fuidic fbers in 
their practice allowed new ways of thinking about movement and 
designing the garment-body interaction, the number of parameters 
to control in achieving a desired actuation showed that a simula-
tion tool would be benefcial to support the design pipeline. For 
example, one participant discovered that the inherent properties 
of the flament used in the outer mesh and its relative elasticity 
to the mechanical constraint thread has signifcant efect on the 
fber’s morphing behaviour. Another participant reported that she 
found it hard to imagine how the fabric would move when the fber 
was knitted in a specifc knit pattern. These suggest an advanced 
computational tool would be benefcial such as [23], where the 
simulation of knitted and woven fabric forms combined with fuid 
dynamics are supported by the tool, for further accessibility of our 
work. 
7.3 Soft, Silent and Embedded Fluidic Control 
System 
While the miniaturization of state-of-the-art power and control 
platforms, like FlowIO, is promising, the noise and rigidity limits 
the compliance and comfort of the user interface. A future research 
direction we plan to pursue is employing advancements in soft 
and stretchable pump technologies for actuating soft muscles [8]. 
Such devices allow for the integration of the fuid supply into the 
wearable system, however current challenges are safety and energy 
efciency. This could alternatively be solved by building systems 
that harvest energy from human motion to acquire high pressure 
fuid power. 
7.4 Expanding the Basic Architecture and Fiber 
Properties 
There exists a rich set of opportunities by expanding the Multilayer 
Fiber Composite construction primitives in Figure 3a, including 
some future considerations and challenges. 
Scaling. When considering scaling, the largest obstacle with 
smaller tubing is the maximum force it will provide. The strength 
of the tubing follows the inverse of the diameter, hence it is the 
maximum hydraulic pressure that will set the limit. Typically, for a 
fber muscle at 5 bar and with 1.4 mm inner diameter, the maximum 
contraction force will be around 15-20 N. In addition, from the 
Hagen-Poiseuille equation5, the pressure drop increases with the 
power of two to a smaller hydraulic diameter if the fow velocity 
(m/s) is kept constant. This will limit the reaction time of ever-
smaller tubing. One advantage is that the fracture strength of the 
tubing will increase with smaller sizes, but sub-millimeter tubing 
still cannot take too high loads. As shown in our experiments, a 
16-flament (0.05 mm thick) braided, 0.6 mm diameter tubing can 
take up to 1 kg of load. 
Sensor. A main challenge with our prototypes is that the place-
ment of sensors require reiteration of channel length and location 
for each application. To overcome such a challenge, future proto-
types could beneft from an increased number of sensor channels 
along the actuator and machine learning to minimize accumulated 
errors from dense sensor readings [7, 16], or optimize the number 
of sensors for a given application [68]. 
Elastomeric tubing. Although not explored in this work, an 
exciting future design space is to customize the internal structure 
of the device by thermal drawing [80] of meters long tubing in con-
sistent core geometries not available of-the-shelf today, followed 
by braiding of diferent angles interlocked around it. 
Working fluid type. Furthermore, new material properties can 
be explored by using liquid media that allow for efcient hydraulic 
actuation [77]. Interactivity can be enhanced with responsive ma-
terials such as low melting point alloys, magnetic and supercritical 
fuids [34, 35, 45], and furthermore using biomaterials such as bodily 
fuids [2] as potential working fuids in a single OmniFiber device, 
or full body-worn system. 
8 CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we introduced OmniFiber, a reconfgurable mate-
rial system based on fuidic fber actuators. By functionalizing the 
fber actuators with strain tunability, we achieve a wide range of 
movement-based I/O that we demonstrate through a variety of de-
sign cases. OmniFiber is built upon fuidic artifcial muscle research, 
which originated from the feld of soft robotics. These actuators 
are soft, and have high output performances (force/strain/speed). 
We expand on this basic actuator with technical improvements 
that together form a comprehensive fber-based system with an 
integrated fabrication pipeline tailored towards the HCI audience. 
OmniFiber exhibits a range of morphing geometries including ex-
tension, contraction, bending, coiling, and micro-texture feedback 
5Hagen-Poiseuille is a physical law that gives the pressure drop in an incompressible 
and Newtonian fuid in laminar fow fowing through a long cylindrical pipe of constant 
cross section. 
1023
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
(Figure 2). Through our design space and applications, we demon-
strate the rich potential of OmniFiber to beneft the research space 
of novel interactive materials on or close to the human body. As 
Qamar et. al pointed out in [55], "[..] the HCI community may ben-
eft from a broader awareness of state-of-the-art material systems 
whereas the material science community has little experience in em-
bedding information processing into structures... The tools needed for 
shaped-interface design need to be more expressive, like the raw and 
versatile materials an industrial designer might use to create complex 
geometries.” OmniFiber contributes to closing this gap, adapting 
and shaping emerging materials to empower interaction designers. 
While there are many future challenges and design opportunities, 
we hope that the wide exploration of OmniFiber as an interaction 
design material and system opens a channel towards using the body 
as an intentional controller for movement-based HCI, leveraging 
sensing and actuating fber-based systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been supported by Hardware for Energy Efcient 
Bodynets funded by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research 
project CHI19-0034. We thank the main author’s spouse Atahan 
Afsar for his invaluable support at all stages of this work during the 
pandemic. The authors would also like to thank The Swedish School 
of Textiles for granting access to textile engineering labs; Erin Lewis 
and Nadia Campo Woytuk for advising on knitting techniques; Prof. 
Stefan Johansson for his professional advice on artifcial muscles; 
Aishni Parab for the preliminary design tool; Priyanka Syal for the 
graphs; Kelsey Cotton for her connoisseurship on singing; Cedric 
Honnet for his time and feedback; Deema Qashat for proofreading; 
and Sanad Bushnaq for the rebuttal support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Lea Albaugh, Scott Hudson, and Lining Yao. 2019. Digital fabrication of soft 
actuated objects by machine knitting. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13. 
[2] Teresa Almeida, Madeline Balaam, Shaowen Bardzell, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 
2020. Introduction to the Special Issue on HCI and the Body: Reimagining 
Women’s Health. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 27, 4, Article 20 (Aug. 2020), 
32 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3406091 
[3] L. An, W.M. Huang, Y.Q. Fu, and N.Q. Guo. 2008. A note on size efect in actuating 
NiTi shape memory alloys by electrical current. Materials & Design 29, 7 (2008), 
1432–1437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2007.09.001 
[4] Mahoro Anabuki and Hiroshi Ishii. 2007. Ar-jig: A handheld tangible user 
interface for modifcation of 3d digital form via 2d physical curve. In 2007 6th 
IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality. IEEE, 
55–66. 
[5] Erick Ball, Michael Meller, Jordan Chipka, and Ephrahim Garcia. 2016. Modeling 
and testing of a knitted-sleeve fuidic artifcial muscle. Smart Materials and 
Structures 25 (11 2016), 115024. https://doi.org/10.1088/0964-1726/25/11/115024 
[6] Priyanuj Bhuyan, Yuwen Wei, Dongho Sin, Jaesang Yu, Changwoon Nah, Kwang-
Un Jeong, Michael Dickey, and Sungjune Park. 2021. Soft and Stretchable Liquid 
Metal Composites with Shape Memory and Healable Conductivity. ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 13 (06 2021). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c06786 
[7] Moritz Bächer, Benjamin Hepp, Fabrizio Pece, Paul G. Kry, Bernd Bickel, Bern-
hard Thomaszewski, and Otmar Hilliges. 2016. DefSense: Computational 
Design of Customized Deformable Input Devices. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, San Jose, California, USA, 3806–3816. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858354 
[8] Vito Cacucciolo, Hiroyuki Nabae, Koichi Suzumori, and Herbert Shea. 2020. 
Electrically-Driven Soft Fluidic Actuators Combining Stretchable Pumps With 
Thin McKibben Muscles. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 6 (2020). https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/frobt.2019.00146 Publisher: Frontiers. 
[9] Thomas P. Chenal, Jennifer C. Case, Jamie Paik, and Rebecca K. Kramer. 2014. 
Variable stifness fabrics with embedded shape memory materials for wearable 
applications. In 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems. 2827–2831. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2014.6942950 
[10] Marcelo Coelho and Jamie Zigelbaum. 2011. Shape-changing interfaces. Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing 15, 2 (2011), 161–173. 
[11] Allen Cypher and Daniel Conrad Halbert. 1993. Watch what I do: programming 
by demonstration. MIT press. 
[12] Alexandra Delazio, Ken Nakagaki, Roberta L Klatzky, Scott E Hudson, Jill Fain 
Lehman, and Alanson P Sample. 2018. Force jacket: Pneumatically-actuated 
jacket for embodied haptic experiences. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12. 
[13] Roy Featherstone and Yee Harn Teh. 2006. Improving the Speed of Shape Mem-
ory Alloy Actuators by Faster Electrical Heating. In Experimental Robotics IX, 
Marcelo H. Ang and Oussama Khatib (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 67–76. 
[14] Jack Forman, Taylor Tabb, Youngwook Do, Meng-Han Yeh, Adrian Galvin, and 
Lining Yao. 2019. ModiFiber: Two-Way Morphing Soft Thread Actuators for 
Tangible Interaction. 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300890 
[15] Andreas Frutiger, Joseph Muth, Daniel Vogt, Yigit Mengüç, Alexandre Campo,  
Alexander Valentine, Conor Walsh, and Jennifer Lewis. 2015. Capacitive Soft 
Strain Sensors via Multicore–Shell Fiber Printing. Advanced materials (Deerfeld 
Beach, Fla.) 27 (03 2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201500072 
[16] Oliver Glauser, Daniele Panozzo, Otmar Hilliges, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. 2019. 
Deformation Capture via Soft and Stretchable Sensor Arrays. ACM Transactions 
on Graphics 38, 2 (March 2019), 16:1–16:16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311972 
[17] Carter Haines, Na Li, Geofrey Spinks, Ali Aliev, Jiangtao Di, and Ray Baughman. 
2016. New twist on artifcial muscles. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 113 (09 2016). https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1605273113 
[18] Nur Al-huda Hamdan, Adrian Wagner, Simon Voelker, Jürgen Steimle, and Jan 
Borchers. 2019. Springlets: Expressive, Flexible and Silent On-Skin Tactile Inter-
faces. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, Glasgow, Scotland Uk, 
1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300718 
[19] Teng Han, Shubhi Bansal, Xiaochen Shi, Yanjun Chen, Baogang Quan, Feng Tian, 
Hongan Wang, and Sriram Subramanian. 2020. HapBead: On-Skin Microfuidic 
Haptic Interface using Tunable Bead. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–10. 
[20] John Hardy, Christian Weichel, Faisal Taher, John Vidler, and Jason Alexander. 
2015. ShapeClip: Towards Rapid Prototyping with Shape-Changing Displays for 
Designers. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea, 19–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702599 
[21] Kristina Höök, Caroline Hummels, Katherine Isbister, Patrizia Marti, Elena 
Márquez Segura, Martin Jonsson, Florian ’Floyd’ Mueller, Pedro A.N. Sanches, 
Thecla Schiphorst, Anna Ståhl, Dag Svanaes, Ambra Trotto, Marianne Graves 
Petersen, and Youn-kyung Lim. 2017. Soma-Based Design Theory. In Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI EA ’17). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 550–557. https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3027082 
[22] Caroline Hummels, Kees C. Overbeeke, and Sietske Klooster. 2007. Move to Get 
Moved: A Search for Methods, Tools and Knowledge to Design for Expressive 
and Rich Movement-Based Interaction. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 11, 8 (Dec. 
2007), 677–690. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-006-0135-y 
[23] Pham Huy Nguyen and Wenlong Zhang. 2020. Design and Computational 
Modeling of Fabric Soft Pneumatic Actuators for Wearable Assistive Devices. 
Scientifc Reports 10 (06 2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65003-2 
[24] Kristina Höök. 2018. Designing with the Body: Somaesthetic Interaction Design. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11481.001.0001 
[25] Hiroshi Ishii, Dávid Lakatos, Leonardo Bonanni, and Jean-Baptiste Labrune. 2012. 
Radical atoms: beyond tangible bits, toward transformable materials. interactions 
19, 1 (2012), 38–51. 
[26] J. M. Jani, M. Leary, A. Subic, and M. Gibson. 2014. A review of shape memory 
alloy research, applications and opportunities. Materials & Design 56 (2014), 
1078–1113. 
[27] Hsin-Liu Kao, Deborah Ajilo, Oksana Anilionyte, Artem Dementyev, Inrak Choi, 
Sean Follmer, and Chris Schmandt. 2017. Exploring interactions and perceptions 
of kinetic wearables. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive 
Systems. 391–396. 
[28] Tural Khudiyev, Jung Lee, Jason Cox, Eric Argentieri, Gabriel Loke, Rodger Yuan, 
Grace Noel, Ryoichi Tatara, Yang Yu, Frannie Logan, John Joannopoulos, Yang 
Shao-Horn, and Yoel Fink. 2020. 100 m Long Thermally Drawn Supercapacitor 
Fibers with Applications to 3D Printing and Textiles. Advanced Materials 32 (11 
2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202004971 
[29] Shoichiro Koizumi, Shunichi Kurumaya, Hiroyuki Nabae, Gen Endo, and Koichi 
Suzumori. 2020. Recurrent Braiding of Thin McKibben Muscles to Overcome 
Their Limitation of Contraction. Soft Robotics 7, 2 (2020), 251–258. https://doi. 
org/10.1089/soro.2019.0022 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2019.0022 PMID: 
31697196. 
1024
UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA Kilic Afsar et al. 
[30] Shunichi Kurumaya, Hiroyuki Nabae, Gen Endo, and Koichi Suzumori. 2017. De-
sign of thin McKibben muscle and multiflament structure. Sensors and Actuators 
A: Physical 261 (July 2017), 66–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2017.04.047 
[31] Shunichi Kurumaya, Hiroyuki Nabae, Gen Endo, and Koichi Suzumori. 2019. 
Active Textile Braided in Three Strands with Thin McKibben Muscle. Soft Robotics 
6, 2 (April 2019), 250–262. https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2018.0076 Publisher: Mary 
Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers. 
[32] Henry Lieberman. 2001. Your wish is my command: Programming by example. 
Morgan Kaufmann. 
[33] W. Liu and C. R. Rahn. 2004. Fiber-Reinforced Membrane 
Models of McKibben Actuators . Journal of Applied Mechan-
ics 70, 6 (01 2004), 853–859. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1630812 
arXiv:https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/appliedmechanics/article-
pdf/70/6/853/5470497/853_1.pdf 
[34] Qiuyu Lu, Chengpeng Mao, Liyuan Wang, and Haipeng Mi. 2016. Lime: Liquid 
metal interfaces for non-rigid interaction. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 449–452. 
[35] Qiuyu Lu, Jifei Ou, João Wilbert, André Haben, Haipeng Mi, and Hiroshi Ishii. 
2019. milliMorph–Fluid-Driven Thin Film Shape-Change Materials for Interaction 
Design. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology. 663–672. 
[36] Ali Maziz, Alessandro Concas, Alexandre Khaldi, Jonas Stalhand, Nils-Krister 
Persson, and Edwin Jager. 2017. Knitting and weaving artifcial muscles. Science 
Advances 3 (01 2017), e1600327. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1600327 
[37] Seyed Mirvakili and Ian Hunter. 2017. Artifcial Muscles: Mechanisms, Ap-
plications, and Challenges. Advanced Materials 30 (12 2017), 1704407. https: 
//doi.org/10.1002/adma.201704407 
[38] Jaronie Mohd Jani, Martin Leary, Aleksandar Subic, and Mark A. Gibson. 2014. A 
review of shape memory alloy research, applications and opportunities. Materials 
& Design (1980-2015) 56 (2014), 1078–1113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2013. 
11.084 
[39] Hila Mor, Tianyu Yu, Ken Nakagaki, Benjamin Harvey Miller, Yichen Jia, and 
Hiroshi Ishii. 2020. Venous Materials: Towards Interactive Fluidic Mechanisms. 
In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–14. 
[40] Sara Nabil, Jan Kučera, Nikoletta Karastathi, David S. Kirk, and Peter Wright. 2019. 
Seamless Seams: Crafting Techniques for Embedding Fabrics with Interactive 
Actuation. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
(San Diego, CA, USA) (DIS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 987–999. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322369 
[41] Ken Nakagaki, Artem Dementyev, Sean Follmer, Joseph Paradiso, and Hiroshi 
Ishii. 2016. ChainFORM: A Linear Integrated Modular Hardware System for 
Shape Changing Interfaces. 87–96. https://doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984587 
[42] Ken Nakagaki, Sean Follmer, Artem Dementyev, Joseph A. Paradiso, and Hiroshi 
Ishii. 2017. Designing Line-Based Shape-Changing Interfaces. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing 16, 4 (Oct. 2017), 36–46. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2017.3971127 
Conference Name: IEEE Pervasive Computing. 
[43] Ken Nakagaki, Sean Follmer, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2015. LineFORM: Actuated Curve 
Interfaces for Display, Interaction, and Constraint. In Proceedings of the 28th 
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology (UIST ’15). 
Association for Computing Machinery, Charlotte, NC, USA, 333–339. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807452 
[44] Ken Nakagaki, Udayan Umapathi, Daniel Leithinger, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2017. Ani-
maStage: Hands-on Animated Craft on Pin-based Shape Displays. In Proceedings 
of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 1093–1097. 
[45] Kenichi Nakahara, Koya Narumi, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 
2017. Electric phase-change actuator with inkjet printed fexible circuit for 
printable and integrated robot prototyping. In 2017 IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 1856–1863. 
[46] Ryosuke Nakayama, Ryo Suzuki, Satoshi Nakamaru, Ryuma Niiyama, Yoshi-
hiro Kawahara, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2019. MorphIO: Entirely Soft Sensing and 
Actuation Modules for Programming Shape Changes through Tangible Inter-
action. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 
(DIS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, San Diego, CA, USA, 975–986. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322337 
[47] Ryuma Niiyama, Xu Sun, Lining Yao, Hiroshi Ishii, Daniela Rus, and Sangbae 
Kim. 2015. Sticky Actuator: Free-Form Planar Actuators for Animated Objects. In 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Em-
bodied Interaction (Stanford, California, USA) (TEI ’15). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 77–84. https://doi.org/10.1145/2677199.2680600 
[48] Takuya Nojima, Yoshiharu Ooide, and Hiroki Kawaguchi. 2013. Hairlytop inter-
face: An interactive surface display comprised of hair-like soft actuators. In 2013 
World Haptics Conference (WHC). 431–435. https://doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2013. 
6548447 
[49] Masaru Ohkubo and Takuya Nojima. 2018. SmartFiber: Reconfgurable Shape 
Changing Interface. In Proceedings of the 9th Augmented Human International 
Conference (AH ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1145/3174910.3174949
[50] Jifei Ou, Mélina Skouras, Nikolaos Vlavianos, Felix Heibeck, Chin-Yi Cheng, 
Jannik Peters, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. aeroMorph-heat-sealing infatable shape-
change materials for interaction design. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Sympo-
sium on User Interface Software and Technology. 121–132. 
[51] Joohee Park, Young-Woo Park, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2014. Wrigglo: shape-changing 
peripheral for interpersonal mobile communication. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 3973–3976. 
[52] Sungjune Park, Neil Baugh, Hardil Shah, Dishit Parekh, Ishan Joshipura, and 
Michael Dickey. 2019. Ultrastretchable Elastic Shape Memory Fibers with Elec-
trical Conductivity. Advanced Science 6 (11 2019), 1901579. https://doi.org/10. 
1002/advs.201901579 
[53] Amanda Parkes and Hiroshi Ishii. 2010. Bosu: a physical programmable design tool 
for transformability with soft mechanics. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference 
on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, 
Aarhus, Denmark, 189–198. https://doi.org/10.1145/1858171.1858205 
[54] Dietrich Parlitz, Thomas Peschel, and Eckart Altenmüller. 1998. Assessment of 
dynamic fnger forces in pianists: Efects of training and expertise. Journal of 
Biomechanics 31, 11 (1998), 1063–1067. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9290(98) 
00113-4 
[55] Isabel P. S. Qamar, Rainer Groh, David Holman, and Anne Roudaut. 2018. HCI 
Meets Material Science: A Literature Review of Morphing Materials for the Design 
of Shape-Changing Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3173574.3173948 
[56] Eberhard Rabe, Hugo Partsch, Michael Jünger, Martin Abel, I Achhammer, 
François Becker, André Cornu-Thénard, Mie Flour, J Hutchinson, K Issberner, Ch 
Mofatt, and F Pannier. 2008. Guidelines for Clinical Studies with Compression 
Devices in Patients with Venous Disorders of the Lower Limb. European journal of 
vascular and endovascular surgery : the ofcial journal of the European Society for 
Vascular Surgery 35 (05 2008), 494–500. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejvs.2007.08.006 
[57] Hayes Solos Rafe, Amanda J. Parkes, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2004. Topobo: a construc-
tive assembly system with kinetic memory. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’04). Association for Computing 
Machinery, Vienna, Austria, 647–654. https://doi.org/10.1145/985692.985774 
[58] Mohammad Rafee, R. D. Farahani, and D. Therriault. 2020. MultiMaterial 3D 
and 4D Printing: A Survey. Advanced Science 7 (2020). 
[59] Majken K Rasmussen, Esben W Pedersen, Marianne G Petersen, and Kasper 
Hornbæk. 2012. Shape-changing interfaces: a review of the design space and 
open research questions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. 735–744. 
[60] Devin J. Roach, Chao Yuan, Xiao Kuang, Vincent Chi-Fung Li, Peter Blake, 
Marta Lechuga Romero, Irene Hammel, Kai Yu, and H. Jerry Qi. 2019. Long 
Liquid Crystal Elastomer Fibers with Large Reversible Actuation Strains 
for Smart Textiles and Artifcial Muscles. ACS Applied Materials & Inter-
faces 11, 21 (2019), 19514–19521. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b04401 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b04401 
[61] Vanessa Sanchez, Conor J. Walsh, and Robert J. Wood. [n.d.]. Textile Tech-
nology for Soft Robotic and Autonomous Garments. Advanced Functional 
Materials n/a, n/a ([n. d.]), 2008278. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202008278 
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adfm.202008278 
[62] Benjamin Shih, Dylan Shah, Jinxing Li, Thomas G Thuruthel, Yong-Lae Park, 
Fumiya Iida, Zhenan Bao, Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio, and Michael T Tolley. 2020. 
Electronic skins and machine learning for intelligent soft robots. (2020). 
[63] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry 
Pi” for Soft Robotics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513 
[64] S. Sridar, C. J. Majeika, P. Schafer, M. Bowers, S. Ueda, A. J. Barth, J. L. Sorrells, 
J. T. Wu, T. R. Hunt, and M. Popovic. 2016. Hydro Muscle -a novel soft fuidic 
actuator. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 
4014–4021. 
[65] Yuta Sugiura, Calista Lee, Masayasu Ogata, Anusha Withana, Yasutoshi Makino, 
Daisuke Sakamoto, Masahiko Inami, and Takeo Igarashi. 2012. PINOKY: a ring 
that animates your plush toys. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, 
Austin, Texas, USA, 725–734. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2207780 
[66] Nobuhiro Takahashi, Shinichi Furuya, and Hideki Koike. 2020. Soft Exoskeleton 
Glove with Human Anatomical Architecture: Production of Dexterous Finger 
Movements and Skillful Piano Performance. IEEE Transactions on Haptics (2020). 
[67] Nobuhiro Takahashi, Hayato Takahashi, and Hideki Koike. 2019. Soft exoskeleton 
glove enabling force feedback for human-like fnger posture control with 20 
degrees of freedom. In 2019 IEEE World Haptics Conference (WHC). IEEE, 217– 
222. 
[68] Javier Tapia, Espen Knoop, Mojmir Mutný, Miguel A. Otaduy, and Moritz Bächer. 
2019. MakeSense: Automated Sensor Design for Proprioceptive Soft Robots. 
Soft Robotics 7, 3 (Dec. 2019), 332–345. https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2018.0162 
Publisher: Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers. 
1025
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based Interactions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’ UIST’21, October 10–14, 2021, Virtual Event, USA 
[69] Jennifer R. A. Taylor and William M. Kier. 2003. Switching 
Skeletons: Hydrostatic Support in Molting Crabs. Science 301, 
5630 (2003), 209–210. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1085987 
arXiv:https://science.sciencemag.org/content/301/5630/209.full.pdf 
[70] Shan-Yuan Teng, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, Chi Wang, Chi-huan Chiang, Da-Yuan Huang, 
Liwei Chan, and Bing-Yu Chen. 2018. Pupop: Pop-up prop on palm for virtual re-
ality. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software 
and Technology. 5–17. 
[71] Rashi Tiwari, Michael A Meller, Karl B Wajcs, Caris Moses, Ismael Reveles, 
and Ephrahim Garcia. 2012. Hydraulic artifcial muscles. Journal of Intelligent 
Material Systems and Structures 23, 3 (2012), 301–312. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1045389X12438627 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/1045389X12438627 
[72] Jonas Togler, Fabian Hemmert, and Reto Wettach. 2009. Living interfaces: the 
thrifty faucet. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Tangible and 
Embedded Interaction. 43–44. 
[73] Marynel Vázquez, Eric Brockmeyer, Ruta Desai, Chris Harrison, and Scott E 
Hudson. 2015. 3d printing pneumatic device controls with variable activation 
force capabilities. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. 1295–1304. 
[74] Akira; Akito Nakano and Michihiko Ueno Wakita. 2011. SMAAD Surface: A 
tangible interface for smart material aided architectural design. In Proceedings 
of the 16th International Conference on Computer Aided Architectural Design 
Research in Asia / The University of Newcastle, Australia 27-29 April 2011, pp. 
355-364. CUMINCAD. http://papers.cumincad.org/cgi-bin/works/BrowseTree= 
series=AZ/Show?caadria2011_034 
[75] Guanyun Wang, Ye Tao, Ozguc Bertug Capunaman, Humphrey Yang, and Lin-
ing Yao. 2019. A-line: 4D Printing Morphing Linear Composite Structures. In 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–12. 
[76] Mark Weiser. 1999. The computer for the 21st century. ACM SIGMOBILE mobile 
computing and communications review 3, 3 (1999), 3–11. 
[77] Chaoqun Xiang, Maria Elena Giannaccini, Theo Theodoridis, Lina Hao, Samia 
Nefti-Meziani, and Steven Davis. 2016. Variable stifness Mckibben mus-
cles with hydraulic and pneumatic operating modes. Advanced Robot-
ics 30, 13 (2016), 889–899. https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864.2016.1154801 
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864.2016.1154801 
[78] Lining Yao, Ryuma Niiyama, Jifei Ou, Sean Follmer, Clark Della Silva, and 
Hiroshi Ishii. 2013. PneUI: pneumatically actuated soft composite materials 
for shape changing interfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM sym-
posium on User interface software and technology (UIST ’13). Association for 
Computing Machinery, St. Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom, 13–22. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502037 
[79] Hong Kai Yap, Jeong Hoon Lim, Fatima Nasrallah, James CH Goh, and Raye CH 
Yeow. 2015. A soft exoskeleton for hand assistive and rehabilitation application 
using pneumatic actuators with variable stifness. In 2015 IEEE international 
conference on robotics and automation (ICRA). IEEE, 4967–4972. 
[80] Rodger Yuan, Jaemyon Lee, Hao-Wei Su, Etgar Levy, Tural Khudiyev, Joel Vold-
man, and Yoel Fink. 2018. Microfuidics in structured multimaterial fbers. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (10 2018), 201809459. https: 
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1809459115 
[81] Taigo Yukisawa, Yasuaki Ishii, Satoshi Nishikawa, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yasuo Ku-
niyoshi. 2017. Modeling of extensible pneumatic actuator with bellows (EPAB) for 
continuum arm. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics 
(ROBIO). 2303–2308. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBIO.2017.8324762 
[82] Jun Zhang, Jun Sheng, Ciarán T O’Neill, Conor J Walsh, Robert J Wood, Jee-Hwan 
Ryu, Jaydev P Desai, and Michael C Yip. 2019. Robotic artifcial muscles: Current 
progress and future perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 35, 3 (2019), 
761–781. 
[83] Zhihao Zhou, K. Chen, X. Li, Songlin Zhang, Yu fen Wu, Yihao Zhou, Keyu 
Meng, Chenchen Sun, Q. He, W. Fan, Endong Fan, Zhiwei Lin, Xulong Tan, 
W. Deng, J. Yang, and Junzhang Chen. 2020. Sign-to-speech translation using 
machine-learning-assisted stretchable sensor arrays. Nature Electronics 3 (2020), 
571–578. 
[84] Kening Zhu and Shengdong Zhao. 2013. AutoGami: a low-cost rapid prototyping 
toolkit for automated movable paper craft. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13). Association for Computing 
Machinery, Paris, France, 661–670. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470748 
[85] Mengjia Zhu, Amirhossein H. Memar, Aakar Gupta, Majed Samad, Priyanshu 
Agarwal, Yon Visell, Sean J. Keller, and Nicholas Colonnese. 2020. PneuSleeve: 
In-fabric Multimodal Actuation and Sensing in a Soft, Compact, and Expressive 
Haptic Sleeve. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, Honolulu, 
HI, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376333 
1026