PneUI: Pneumatically Actuated Soft Composite Materials 
for Shape Changing Interfaces 
Lining Yao1, Ryuma Niiyama1, Jifei Ou1, Sean Follmer1, Clark Della Silva2, Hiroshi Ishii1 
1MIT Media Lab 
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA 
{lining, ryuma, jifei, sean, ishii}@ media.mit.edu 
2MIT EECS 
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA 
clarkds@ mit.edu 
 
 
Figure 1:  Application demonstration s. (a) A shape changing mobile . (b) Height changing tangible phicons . (c) A transformable 
tablet case.  (d) A shape-shifting lamp.
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents PneUI, an enabling technology  to build 
shape-changing interfaces through pneumatically -actuated 
soft composite materials. The composite materials integrate 
the capabilities of both input sensing and active shape 
output. This is enabled by the composites’ multi- layer 
structures with di fferent mechanical or electrical properties. 
The shape changing states are computationally controllable 
through pneumatics and pre- defined structure.  We explore 
the design space of PneUI through four applications: height 
changing tangible phicons,  a shape changing mobile , a 
transformable tablet case  and a shape shifting lamp.  
Author Keywords 
Soft Composite Material;  Pneumatic System; Soft Actuator; 
Soft Robotics;  Human-Material Interaction; Shape 
Changing Interface; Radical Atoms; Organic User Interface  
ACM Classification Keywords  
H.5.2. User Interfaces : Haptic I/O; Prototype 
INTRODUCTION 
Hard bodies with construction of rigid structural and 
electronic elements have limited the form, function and 
interaction of shape changing interfaces in HCI  [37]. Thus a 
range of technologies in HCI have been developed to 
enable soft and organic in terfaces, including flexible 
sensing techniques [ 28], dynamic stiffness  [3], texture and 
buttons on malleable surfaces [6, 7], soft deformable 
surface output [ 1, 13], and 2.5D shape display with elastic 
covers [18].  In contrast, inspired by marine organisms that 
sense and accomplish drastic body deformation and 
locomotion by soft actuators [28], we take a holistic view of 
the material itself and envision a composite material that 
integrates input sensing and active shape output.  Materials 
with different mechanical properties can be combined to  
form separate structural layers for the soft composites, 
which can be utilized to create shape changing interfaces 
without rigid mechanical elements. This research is driven 
by the vision of Radical Atoms [ 11], which proposes a 
group of physical materials as a dynamic manifestation of 
digital information. 
While the study of soft motion and mechanisms is a 
growing topic in robotics , approaches and techniques in soft 
robotics have not been fully explored in HCI.  In this paper, 
we presented PneUI, pneumatically actuated soft composite 
materials, that follow three principles:  1) the shape output is 
computationally controllable through pneumatics and pre -
defined structure; 2) the material should enable either 
isotropic (uniform in all orientations) or anisotropic 
(directionally dependent) deformation determined by the 
intrinsic properties of the  composite; 3) the material should 
integrate both input sensing and active shape output. 
Examples of utilizing shape changing primitives for HCI 
applications are illustrated in Figure 1.  
In this paper , we first describe the design considerations of 
applying our soft composite materials for HCI. We then talk 
about the layered structures of soft composite materials  and 
explain the composites’ active shape output and input 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies  are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.  To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
permissions@acm.org. 
UIST'13, October 08 – 11, 2013, St. Andrews, United Kingdom. 
Copyright © 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2268-3/13/10...$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502037  
sensing capabilities in separate chapters. Finally, we 
describe pneumatic control systems and applications.  
We present the following main contributions: 
• Creation of pneumatically actuated soft composite 
materials, which integrate s both input sensing and 
active shape output.  
• Development of a framework for creation and testing 
of selected materials, structures, soft fabrication 
processes, and pneumatic control systems to construct 
soft composite materials.  
• Primitives of soft shape changing at both macro and 
micro scales, including curvature change of surfaces, 
unidirectional volume change of solid geometries, and 
dynamic texture change.  
• Development of two techniques that embed sensing 
into composite material and interfaces: 1) conductive 
pads composited on structural layers for sensing shape 
output and gestural input using capacitive and electric 
field sensing; 2) liquid metal embedded in elastomeric 
air channels for sensing deformation of soft surfaces.  
RELATED WORK 
Soft Robotics 
Soft robotics is an emerging domain that is dedicated to 
robots comprised of soft components including soft 
actuators, flexible sensor/circuits, and soft bodies [ 10]. In 
contrast to other techniques for shape change, such as 
spatial arrangement of actuated modules [ 20], self -foldable 
chains [9], self-foldable surfaces [ 8, 15], soft robotics often 
focuses on pneumatic actuation of elastomeric channels and 
bladders. Pneumatic actuation is chosen because air is a 
lightweight, compressible and environmentally benign 
energy source [32].  
While a primary focus of soft robotics is  the improvement 
of the robot's performance and the exploration of the bio -
inspired mechanism itself, there is a large space to 
introduce soft robotic technology in constructing shape 
changing interfaces. One design space is to explore not only 
isotropic, but also anisotropic deformation with soft 
composite materials: an elastomer by itself deforms 
uniformly under stress; however, by compositing different 
structural layers with various mechanical properties, t he 
orientation of deformation can be pre -defined [ 19]. We 
build on this work by exploring other topologies, 
integrating sensing, and applying these concepts to HCI.   
Shape Changing User Interfaces  
The exploration of Shape Changing User Interfaces in HCI 
is still in its infancy, as techniques for shape change, 
flexible sensing and interaction techniques are being 
developed [ 2, 37]. Shape- Changing Mobile s [9] are 
actuated by RC servo motors  to provide tapering of the 
back of the mobile phone. Densely arranged linear actuator 
arrays have demonstrated successful results in presenting 
complex 2.5D relief forms [ 18]. Those rigid mechanisms 
can achieve controllable transformations, yet not compliant, 
making it hard for these systems to conform to intricate 
shapes and limiting the amount of possible shape change  
states. Shape memory alloy (SMA) based actuators have 
been used to bend surfaces [ 1]. It has been integrated into 
mobile devices [ 27, 5] allowing for edges to be bent. SMA 
is lightweight and strong for its weight, but often slow.  
In the field of HCI , pneumatic inflation has also been 
explored as an approach for shape change. Volflex [ 12] is a 
volumetric display consisting of independently co ntrolled 
balloons. Deformable convex or concave hemispherical 
membranes with rims can be used for an inflatable multi -
touch display [35]. Inflatable Mouse [ 13] is a shape- shifting 
mouse that can change the volume by using an air balloon 
and a built -in pump. Closely related to our work , Harrison 
explored dynamically changeabl e physical buttons on a 
display, with a variety of different materials for creating 
soft and ridged buttons, and integrated multi -touch sensing 
on the surface through diffuse illumination, pressure 
sensing for input [ 7]. Granular jamming [ 3], which can also 
be controlled pneumatically, can provide malleable surface 
with adjustable stiffness, and allows for passive shape 
change. In contrast to jamming, this work focuses on 
pneumatic actuation – allowing for active shape change . 
The types of shape change in HCI have been categorized as: 
orientation, form, volume, texture, viscosity, spatiality, 
adding/subtracting and permeability [ 26]. We chose to 
focus on curvature, volume and texture as shape change 
primitives because we believe those encompass a large 
space of shape change in mobile and tangible applications, 
as demonstrated by past work [ 9, 6, 27]. 
Flexible Sensing Techniques 
A range of sensing techniques on soft surf aces has been 
explored in HCI, optical sensing [ 3] and flexible capacitive 
sensing [ 3, 31] are amon g common approaches. “Sensing 
through structure” has been introduced to sense the 
deformation of flexible surfaces and structures [ 33, 8]. 
In Soft Robotics, sensing through the deformation of the 
surface itself is a unique approach afforded by the elastic 
nature of soft materials.  A range of stretchy sensors, bend 
sensors and pressure sensors have been built [ 1, 22,16, 17]. 
Soft Fabrication  
We choose fabrication processes that are feasible in 
common fabrication laboratories. One notable case is Soft 
Lithography [ 25], which is used to generate 3D structures 
within elastic polymers. Soft roboticists adapted the process 
for fabricating elastomer, especially silicon rubber, with 
integrated air bladders and channels. This process requires 
high precision equipment and fabrication processes, such as 
high resolution molds, spin coaters, and precise deposition 
process.   
 
Figure 2:  Diagram of composite structure. Structure Layer I responds isotropically  to stress; Structure Layer II enables 
anisotropic deformation in response to air pressure; Sensing Layer enables the sensing of both hand input and shape output; Add -
on Layer manipulates other material properties rather than the shape change, either hap tically or visually. The underlined 
materials and structures are the ones that have been tested out.
SOFT COMPOSITE INTER FACE FOR HCI 
Pneumatic soft c omposites provide many opportunities for 
designing significant and novel applications for  HCI, 
primarily as an enabling technology for shape changing 
user interfaces.  Shape change can be used to convey 
information to the user about computational state and 
provide dynamic affordances. By combining a sensing layer 
in the soft composite interface, PneUI interface  can sense a 
range of inputs and outputs.  
Information Representation 
Shape change, both at the macro and micro level, can be 
used to convey computational states to users as a type of 
display. For example, smaller scale shape change, which we 
call texture change, has previously been shown to enable a 
separate haptic channel for representing or communicating 
information [ 6]. Pneumatic soft c omposites provide 
dynamically controllable texture patterns that can vary 
density, frequency and sequence.  A shape changing iPad 
case is introduced in the paper as an example of dynamic 
textures.   
Dynamic Affordances and Ergonomics  
Shape c hange can also provide new ways for users to 
interact with devices on demand. In addition to dynamic 
physical affordances, adaptable shapes can increase 
economic performance for specific tasks.  We develop a 
prototype of mobile phone that can change shape and 
motion for different use cases. 
Sensing Modalities 
We categorize the achievable sensing modalities into: 1) 
sensing gestures on the surface, 2) gestures hovering over 
the surface, 3) gestures that deform the surface, and 4) air 
deforming the surface. The first three are input modalities, 
and the last one i s shape output. Further, the innate 
characteristics of soft interface could afford a wider variety 
of manipulations to deform the surface, such as pushing, 
stretching, bending, embracing, stroking and squeezing.  A 
system of shape changing tangible phicons is developed to 
demonstrate different gesture sensing modalities. 
STRUCTURE OF THE SOF T COMPOSITE MATERIAL  
Layered Structure 
Our pneumatically -actuated soft composite material is 
designed to enable both isotropic and anisotropic 
deformation in response to air pressure. The composite 
material is fabricated with three main layers, including two 
structural layers and one sensing layer  (Figure 2) . One 
structural layer utilizes an elastomeric polymer (or 
elastomer) as the main material to enable isotropic shape 
deformation. To go beyond isotropic deformation, an 
additional structural layer includes a range of materials with 
different elasticity to create constrained anisotrop ic 
deformation in response to air pressure. Moreover, 
conductive materials, either solid  or liquid, such as 
conductive thread and liquid metal, are composited as the 
sensing layer to sense both input and output. Finally an add -
on layer can be composited to control other material 
properties other than active shape output. For example, 
Jamming particles can control surface stiffness to give 
haptic affordances or lock shapes in a certain state [3 ]; and 
thermochromic liquid crystals can be injected into air 
channels of elastomer to cha nge the color of surfaces . 
Materials Choices 
Each layer of the composite includes one or more materials 
with extrinsically designed structures. These structures can 
enhance or modify the  deformations caused by pneumatic 
inflation. For example, copy paper itself has  relatively low 
elasticity, however, origami structure enables increased 

flexibility in a specific directions. Further, composited 
conductive layers can form a sensing network. For example, 
placing electrodes on to 3D substrates enables sensing  the 
3D shape output through changes in capacitance. 
Selecting different materials from Figure 2 , and layering  
them in different orders allow  the construction of multiple 
soft composite materials. The choice of materials is driven 
both by the type of shape change we want to achieve and 
also materials that we think other researchers would have 
ready access to, so as to make our work more accessible.  
The underlined materials from Figure 2 are the ones that 
have been verified during our exploratory experiments. We 
constructed the table assuming that air is the main actuation 
method. By introducing a greater variety of energy sources, 
we could composite additional ranges of active materials, 
such as heat -driven shape memory alloys and 
thermoplastics. 
SHAPE CHANGING PRIMITIVES 
We choose curvature, volume and texture to explore how 
soft pneumatic composite material s provide  a range of 
deformation behaviors and thus enable or enhance shape  
changing interfaces on bo th the macro and micro level  
(Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3: Shape changing primitives: curvature, volume and 
texture. 
Curvature Change on Surfaces - Bending and Curling 
The soft mechanical alphabet [2 ] describes the combination 
of compression and elongat ion to generate curvatures at 
given point s of a surface.  This is the basis to create 
physical forms under the constraints of preserved 
topological equivalents. We introduce two types of 
composite materials to generate such surface curvatures, 
utilizing compression and elongation behaviors with 
inflatable airbags (Figure 4). For both cases, crease patterns 
on the paper layer or the location of airbags define the 
position of the deformation.  Air pressure determines the 
degree of curvature.  
Elongation with Elastic Airbags for Bending and Curling  
This composite material includes three layers, a silicon 
layer with embedded airbags connected with air channels, a 
paper layer with crease patterns, and a thin silicon layer at 
the bottom to bond and protect the paper la yer (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 4. Surface curvature can be determined by the 
compression of airbags with low elasticity (a), or the 
elongation of airbags with high elasticity (b) . 
While soft actuators have been introduced before [ 19], our 
work focuses on introducing paper composite with various 
crease patterns  to control the bending behavior.  When 
inflated, the inner airbags function as actuators to generate 
elongation and force the surface to bend towards the 
opposite direction. 
 
Figure 5: (a, b) Structure of the composite . (c, d, e) Fabrication 
process. (c) Pre-mixture of silicon (EcoFlex 00-30, Smooth-on, 
Inc) is poured into a 3D printed mold designed to form a shape 
with air channels. (d) Creased paper is soaked into the same 
silicon mixture. (e) Silicon and paper layer are peeled off 
molds separately once thermally cured. Two layers are then 
bonded with uncured silicon.  
In this case, dynamic control of the curvature is determined 
by two factors: air pressure and crease pattern. First, air 
pressure can control the degree of curvature. Our 
experiments show how pumping additional air w ill make a 
single bending ( Figure 6d) turn into a curl ing with 
continuous bending  (Figure 6e). Secondly, the design of 
paper crease patterns will affect the deformation. We vary 
three factors of crease patterns i n our experiments: density, 
location and angle. Figure 6a and 6b indicate how density 
affects the sharpness of bending.  Low density creases 
enable sharper bends and by varying the location of crease, 
we can control the bending location on the surface ( Figure 
6c and 6d).  Laying out the crease lines diagonally (Figure 

6f) generates  helical shapes instead of curling on a single 
plane (Figure 6e). Finally, through Figure 6g and 6h we 
demonstrate a variation of on -surface pattern cuts on thin 
pieces of wood instead of paper. It shows similar bending 
and curling behaviors.  
 
Figure 6: (a, b) Crease patterns with varied density; (b, c ) 
Crease patterns at varied location; (d, e) (e, f) Crease patterns 
with varied angles; (g, h) Crease patterns on thin wood.  
To apply the aforementioned approaches of dynamic 
control of shape changing states, we test how specifically 
designed c rease patterns and respective control of airbags 
can make a flat circular shape morph into different spatial 
structures with three stands ( Figure 7a). We also show a 
progressive transformatio n from a line to a square ( Figure 
7b). 
 
Figure 7: Specifically designed crease patterns and respective 
control of airbags enabling dynamic transformation of shapes.  
Compression with Nonelastic Airbags  
This composite material includes two layers: a plain paper 
layer and plastic ai rbags with low elasticity (Figure 8a). 
Airbags are fabricated using plastic welding and glued with 
the paper layer. While inflated, the airbags behave like the 
biceps (the muscle to pull the arm up), and compresses 
itself to cause the surface to bend. The inflation of 
nonelastic airbags happens on the same side as the surfa ce 
bends towards ( Figure 8). Experiments indicate that  muscle 
like nonelastic airbags have stronger bending force  than 
aforementioned elastic airbags , and can bend thicker paper 
or surfaces made from thin wood or plastic.  
 
Figure 8: (a, b, c) Curvature control by size of the airbag. (d) 
Combination of the two different airbag sizes.  
Unidirectional Volume Change of Solid Geometries  
Origami is adapted through engineering methods to create 
3D structures out of paper folds [ 36]. Inspired by the work 
in soft robotics that combines origami with elastomer s to 
build soft actuators [ 19], we explore the orientational 
volume changing behaviors. We do this through 
compositing a range of origami structures with elastomer s. 
The origami  structures are spin coated and sealed with 
silicon (EcoFlex 00- 30, Smooth -on, Inc), allowing the 
volume change to be actuated with air transported into the 
hollow space (Figure  9). Direct manipulation can also 
deform the shape. 
 
Figure 9: (a) Structure of the composite surface that forming 
the volume. (b) Air is pumped into the hollow space for 
actuation. 
Three orientational volume changing behaviors are 
explored: 1) linear elongation, 2) angular expansion and 3) 
rotatory elongation. Acco rdion structure folded from V -
pleats [24] enables linear elongation (Figure 10a). Utilizing 
the same pleating pattern and bonding one side of the folds 
with silico n, we are able to achieve angular expansion 
(Figure 10b). Lastly, rotatory elongation can be achieved 
with cylindrical structure s folded with triangular pleats 
(Figure 10c) [29]. In this case silicon serves  three functions: 
sealing the origami structure for air actuation, coating the 
paper surface for enhancing material durability, and 

constraining elasticity of origami structure within a specific 
range. 
 
Figure 10: (a) Linear elongation. (b) Angular elongation. (c) 
Rotatory elongation. 
Dynamic Texture Change  
We perceive the change of texture as a local and micro 
level shape changing behavior occurring on the surface. 
Two approaches are examined to generate textures on soft 
surfaces: fabricating air bubbles inside elastomer and 
compositing fabric with cut patte rns. Conductive threads, 
such as  plated silver type threads , can be embedded in the 
composite material for human touch and gesture sensing.  
 
Figure 11: (a, b) Structure of the composite material. (c, d, e) 
Fabrication process. (c) Pouring pre -mixture of silicon into a 
mold with threads of beads suspended in the mid -air. (d) 
Thermally curing the silicon and peeling it off the mold. (e) 
Pulling the beads out of the silicon for the final sample.  
Fabricating Air Bubbles inside Elastomer  
In the sample from Figure  11, each column of air bubbles 
can be inflated separately.  We can vary the density, 
frequency and sequence of texture by pumping and 
vacuuming air in separate columns at different times. The 
combination of the three factors is capable of 
communicating different types of information, such as 
directional signals  and speed. Also, by compositing a 
second silicon layer with bigger airbags, we can combine 
deformation on both macro and micro level, to create 
texture patterns on a deformable, 3D surface.  
Compositing Fabric with Cut Patterns  
Another approach to generate texture on soft surfaces is to 
composite flexible material with cut patterns (Figure 12). 
Elastic fabri c (Spandex) was chosen due to its compliance 
under stress when composited with silicon.  
 
Figure 12: (a) Structure of composite material. (b) Fabric 
constraints of deformation in local areas of surface.  
The difference in the elastic modulus of fabric compared 
with silicon creates multi -state deformation. We 
demonstrate that the same surface will deform from macro 
to micro level as air pressure is increased (Figure 13). 
 
Figure 13: As the increase of air pressure, the su rface deform 
from global to local region.  
One advantage of a fabric -elastomer composite is the ease 
of designing and fabricating  different patterns. Rather than 
making customized molds for textures, patterns can be 
quickly designed and cut w ith digital fabrication methods , 
such as laser cutting . Figure 14  shows a variety of texture 
patterns we have explored.  
 
Figure 14: Different textures are generated due to different cut 
patterns on the fabric composite layer.   
COMPOSITE SENSING LA YER 
To sense input and output, we have explored different 
sensing techniques, including compositing elect rodes to 
sense global structur al change , and embedding fluid 
conductors to sense local surface defor mation with high 
sensitivities. The cause of shape deformation can be air or 
human gestures. 
Composite Thin and Flexible Circuitry  
Flexible circuitry, which is cut out of copper tape or printed 
by an inkjet printer with conductive ink, can be composited 
as a sensing layer in the soft composite material. We 
designed customizable electrode patterns to sense direct 
touch and near range proximity by measuring the 

capacitance between human fingers and the electrode 
network. A coating of silicon layer on top of the sensing 
pads enables insulation. Multilayer circuitry can be 
composited with silicon layer s in between. Furt her, through 
the application of shape shifting lamp, we have also 
demonstrated the possibility of compositing rigid electrical 
components, such as surface mounted LEDs, with in soft 
bodies. 
Composite Sensors on Folding Structures  
In the case of using origami as a supporting and 
constraining structure, electrodes  made from copper tape  
can be composited with paper folds to sense structural 
deformations.  These deformations can be caused by either 
pneumatic actuation or direct manipulation .  The separation 
distance between folds correlates to the capacitance 
between the electrodes as shown in Figure 15. For a linear 
accordion, four electrode pairs on both sides of the structure 
were sufficient to measure the height of each side. Other 
electrode placemen ts can be extended to sense additional 
geometrical folding structures.  
 
Figure 15: Four pairs of electrodes on adjacent faces of the 
folds are used to sense geometrical deformation.  (a, b) Sensing 
the height. (c) Sensing side bending. (d) Sensing diagonal 
bending. 
Measurements are taken by stimulating one electrode with a 
square wave and then reading the induced voltage on the 
adjacent electrodes .  Readings are taken at time T after the 
rising and falling edges of the square wave, and the 
difference between these measurements is averaged for 23 
cycles (Figure 16 ).  Because the time constant of an RC 
circuit is dependent on C, as C changes, the voltage at time 
T changes, allowing for relative changes in capacitance to 
be measured.  Sensor data for each side is averaged and 
then passed through a windowed time averag e in order to 
eliminate noise.  The value for each side is then unity -
normalized to determine the relative height of each side.  
Composite Liquid Metal in Elastomeric Channels  
Soft robotic engineers have shown how to construct elastic 
sensing surfaces by i njecting conductive liquid metal 
(eGaIn) into inner channels of elastomer [ 1]. The resistance 
of liquid metal changes in response to the deformation of 
the channels. 
 
Figure 16: Relative side heights for various deformations of a 
linear accordion 
We adapt this sensing technique  to fabricate the top layer of 
the composite material.  It can  sense surface deformation 
through both direct  manipulation and air actuation  (Figure 
17). These conductive channels can also be used for 
capacitive sensing. 
 
Figure 17:  The resistance of liquid metal sensor changes in 
response to the deformation of the elastomeric channels 
through either air actuation (b) or direct manipulation (c) .  
PNEUMATIC CONTROL SY STEMS 
The pneumatic control system energize s the soft composite 
material. Air can be either injected into air channels inside 
elastomer, or introduced into the space wrapped  around by 
the composite material.  
There are three modes to control the airflow in and out of 
the soft composite material: supply, exhaust, and close. The 
supply/exhaust is the mode to inflate/deflate an air bag. The 
close mode stops the airflow to air ins ide the composite.  
Figure 18 shows a pn eumatic control circuit consisting  of 
two 3 -port solenoid valves, an air compressor, and a 
vacuum pump for a single air bag.  
 
Figure 18: (Left) Basic pneumatic circuit for single air bag; 
(Right) self-contained pneumatic system  
We use a large -sized stationary air compressor  (Silent Aire 
Tech., Super Silent compressor 50 ) and a vacuum pump 
(Rocker Scientific, Oil -Free Pump 300 ) for experiments. 
However, t ypical tethered pneumatic systems with a 

stationary air compressor limits use in portable applications. 
Therefore, we developed a miniature pneumatic control 
system with small solenoid valves (SMC, Series S070), a 
pump used as both supply and vacuum (Koge Electronics, 
Series KPV), and lithium polymer battery (3.7V, 110mAh). 
The system indicates feasibility of a further mobile 
application. The noise levels of the systems are 40dB and 
72dB for the stationary air co mpressor and the miniature 
pump used in the portable system, respectively (catalog 
value). 
APPLICATIONS 
We build four prototypes to explore the potential of shape 
changing interfaces enabled by the soft composite material. 
Different soft fabrication proces ses that combine structural 
layers with sensing layers are described in brief. 
Shape Changing Mobile : Fabricating Multi-state 
Bending Surfaces 
The shape changing mobile  is a flexible body that enables 
multiple bending states, to give users dynamic affordances 
for various use cases. The surface will animate between flat 
and bending state  when a call comes in . It can morph from 
a bar  shape to a curved phone shape if a user answers the  
phone call; when placed over the user’s arm , it turns into  a 
wearable wristband  (Figure 19). 
The fabrication of the shape changing mobile  is based on 
one type of the aforementioned primitives: curvature 
change on surfaces.  Touch sensing pads are composited on 
both upper and bottom side to detect direct touch.  
 
Figure 19: (a) Wrist band mode (b) Bar mode (c) Phone mode  
Height Changing Tangible Phicons:  Origami Composite 
with Sensing 
This application  demonstrates the controllability and 
connectivity of multiple height -changing objects mediated 
by graphics  (Figure 20). The system casts computationally 
generated digital shadows on a graphic touch screen 
corresponding to the height of the box and imaginary time. 
Users can change the height of the box by push/pull and 
release the top. In addition, a user can change the height of 
the box by editing the digital shadow with drag gesture. 
This application is intended for computer -aided urban 
planning in which total capacity of the buildings is one of 
the conditions. By making bridge between boxes, users can 
also examine the height of the boxes w ithout changing total 
volume of the multiple boxes.  
 
Figure 20: (a) Direct push/pull height -changing of the box with 
shadow simulation (b) Height -changing by editing digital 
shadow (c) Connecting two boxes with bridge and setting total 
volume constraint 
The construction is based on linear elongation of shape 
changing primitives. The composite sensing techniques of 
the folding structure is adapted to sense the height change 
of the buildings. The main fabrication process includes 
pasting electrodes on paper, folding origami  structures, dip 
coating and spin coating with silicon.  
Transformable Tablet Cases : Fabricating Multilayer 
Airbags 
For this prototype, while bigger airbags are inflated as 
grippers for a car racing game controller, columns of 
smaller air bubbles on top can be inflated sequentially to 
directions through haptics  (Figure 21). 
 
Figure 21: (a) Flat tablet cover in initial state. (b) Macro 
volume change for forming grips and micro volume change for 
haptic sensation. 
This prototype demonstrates the hybrid of macro and micro 
level shape change, based on the isotropic deformation 
behavior exhibited by homogeneous elastomer. Flexible 
texture layer is molded on top of the bigger airbags.  The 
fabrication involves multi -stage molding and casting. To 
keep the prototype thin an d light, we embed two flat Mylar 
pieces during the casting process, to create two flat yet 
inflatable airbags below finer texture bubbles.  
Shape-shifting Lamp : Soft Lithography with Embedded 
Sensing and Light 
This lamp supports large deformation from  a straight strip 
shape to a rounded bulb shape. User s can pull the strip like 
pulling the chain of a conventional lamp. The strip is the 
illuminating light itself and it starts to curl and light up . 

This demonstrates Shape- changing combined with optical 
properties (Figure 22). 
 
Figure 22: (a, b) Lamp in straight state capable of user input 
by pulling the entire body . (b) Silicon with embedded liquid 
metal as pulling sensor. (c, d) Lamp in bulb state by curling  
The construction of the lamp is inspired by one type of 
shape changing primitives: the curling behavior under 
curvature change on surfaces. Silicon with embedded liquid 
metal is fabricated as pulling se nsor, which is attached to 
the top of the lamp stip.  Soft lithography is adapted for 
fabricating the shape -shifting lamp. Before the casting 
process, surface mounted LEDs are soldered on top of 
flexible copper strips. We then bond the copper strips with 
a paper substrate with angular cut patterns. The two layers, 
paper layer and air channel layer, are bonded together with 
half cured silicon. 
LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK 
While the current soft composite material s have unique 
limitations in both design and fabrication processes, it 
opens up exciting directions to explore in the future. 
Compositing Active Material  
The current fabrication process allows the interf aces to 
morph between two shapes, by designing certain structure 
layers that composite with airbags. It is still desired that the 
interface can have multiple shape -changing states that can 
be dynamically controlled in real -time. This could be 
achieved by i ntroducing other active stimulus  and 
compositing a wider range of active materials. For example, 
by embedding memory alloy or heat reactive polymers, and 
combining two actuation sources (air and heat respectively), 
we might be able to achieve more flexible control of shape 
changing states. This is a step closer towards 
programmable, dynamically controllable, shape changing 
interfaces. 
Variations of Source for Actuation  
Current stationary system has limited mobility. We have 
shown an untethered  mobile pneumati c system in the 
previous section. However the pumping and vacuuming 
speed drops significantly in the mobile system. Another 
issue of the pneumatic system is the continuous noise of the 
pump. The noise can be reduced with an insulation 
enclosure. 
Future work is required to explore new approaches to 
enable smaller, faster  and more integrated pneumatic 
control systems. Exploring other types of fl uid rather than 
air to actuate and deform the soft composites is also an 
exciting direction, and it may enable new interaction 
behaviors. For example, Helium, or hot air can let inflated 
surfaces float in air or water.  Using chemical reactions to 
generate gas sources may help eliminate hard pneumatic 
control systems. 
Extension of Shape Changing Behaviors  
Other types of shape changing behaviors are yet to be 
explored systematically. A broader and systematic 
exploration of shape changing primitives could inc rease use 
cases in the design of shape changing interfaces. For 
example, topological change, including creating holes on 
surfaces, can give interesting affordances for interaction. 
Locomotion as a bio- inspired mechanism can be achieved 
with programmable co nstraints in the material structure 
[32]. Shape locking is currently implemented with solenoid 
switches. However, stiffness changing materials, such as 
Jamming particles, can be adapted to lock shapes or 
introduce dynamic constraints.  
3D Printing as a Promising Fabrication Approach  
Soft fabrication requires handwork and time -consuming 
cast molding processes. This issue could be improved by 
using enhanced 3D printing technology . While current 
commercially available 3D printers are not able to print 
material with high elasticity, we envision printing elastic 
polymer will be feasible in the near future. It is helpful for 
constructing complex air channels, combining soft and hard 
materials, and additional automatic fabrication process.  
CONCLUSION 
We have presented various types of shape -changing 
interface enabled by pneumati c soft composite materials . 
By i ntroducing constraints through materials with pre -
programmed structures, we can design and control the 
direction, location and angle of deformation. We 
demonstrated shape-changing primitives , and  present a 
framework and test results of the selection of materials, 
structures, soft fabrication processes, and pneumatic control 
systems to construct soft composite materials. The soft 
composite material is a fusion of sensing and actuation on 
the single -piece of malleable material. This approach 
creates new opportunities to employ shape -changing 
interfaces by using responsive material s. 
CONCLUSION 
We thank Chengyuan Wei, Daniel Leithinger, Ken Perlin, 
Sheng Kai Tang, Jie Qi and David  Mellis for their  
willingness to brainstorm  ideas, Hiroshi Chigira for sharing 
his network platform,  James Weaver and Mike Tolley for 
their suggestion on 3D printed molds, and Nan -Wei Gong 
for her support on the inject printed conductive pads.  
REFERENCES 
1. Coelho, M., Ishii, H., and Maes, P. Surflex: a 
programmable surface for the design of tangible 
interfaces. In CHI EA  ’08, ACM (2008), 3429-3434. 
2.  Coelho, M. and Zigelbaum, J. Shape -changing 
interfaces. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 15 , 2 
(2010), 161–173. 

3. Follmer, S., Leithinger, D., Olwal, A. , Cheng, N., and 
Ishii, H. Jamming user interfaces: programmable particle 
stiffness and sensing for malleable and shape -changing 
devices. In UIST ’12, ACM (2012), 519-528. 
4. Frey, M. CabBoots: Shoes with integrated Guidance 
System. In TEI  ’07, ACM(2007), 245–246. 
5. Gomes, A., Nesbitt, A., and Vertegaal, R. MorePhone  : A 
Study of Actuated Shape Deformations for Flexible Thin -
Film Smartphone Notifications. In CHI ’13, ACM (2013), 
583–592. 
6. Harrison, C. and Hudson, S. Texture displays: a passive 
approach to tactile presentation. In CHI ’09, ACM (2009), 
2261–2264. 
7. Harrison, C. and Hudson, S.E. Providing dynamically 
changeable physical buttons on a visual display. In CHI 
’09, ACM (2009), 299–308. 
8. Hawkes, E., An, B., Benbernou, N.M.,  Tanaka, H., Kim, 
S., Demaine, E. D., Rus, D., and Wood. R. J . 
Programmable matter by folding. PNAS 107, 28 (2010), 
12441–12445. 
9. Hemmert, F., Hamann, S., Löwe, M., Zeipelt, J., and 
Joost, G. Shape-changing mobiles: tapering in two -
dimensional deformat ional displays in mobile phones . In 
CHI EA  ’10, ACM (2010), 3075–3079. 
10. Ilievski, F., Mazzeo , A.D., Shepherd, R.F., Chen, X., 
and Whitesides, G.M. Soft robotics for chemists.  Angew. 
Chem.Int. Ed., 50, 8 (2011), 1890–1895.  
11. Ishii, H., Lakatos, D., Bonanni, L. , and Labrune J.B. 
Radical Atoms  : Beyond Tangible Bits , Toward 
Transformable Materials. Interactions 19, 1 (2012), 38–
51. 
12. Iwata, H., Yano, H., and Ono, N. Volflex. In 
SIGGRAPH  ’05, ACM (2005). 
13. Kim, S., Kim, H., Lee, B., Nam, T. -J., and Lee, W. 
Inflatable mouse: volume -adjustable mouse with air -
pressure-sensitive input and haptic feedback . In CHI  ’08, 
ACM (2008), 211-214. 
14. Knaian, A.N., Cheung, K.C., Lobovsky, M.B., Oines, 
A.J., Schmidt-Neilsen, P., and Gershenfeld, N.A. T he 
Milli-Motein: A self-folding chain of programmable 
matter with a one centimeter module pitch. In IROS ’02, 
1447–1453. 
15. Koizumi, N., Yasu, K., Liu, A., Sugimoto, M., and 
Inami, M. Animated Paper: A Toolkit for Building 
Moving Toys. Computers in Entertainment 8 , 2 (2010). 
16. Kramer, R.K., Majidi, C., Sahai, R., and Wood, R.J. 
Soft curvature sensors for joint angle proprioception. In 
IROS ’11, IEEE/RSJ (2011), 1919–1926. 
17. Kramer, R.K., Majidi, C., and Wood, R.J. Wearable 
tactile keypad with stretchable artificial skin.  In IROS ’11, 
IEEE/RSJ (2011), 1103–1107. 
18. Leithinger, D., Lakatos, D., DeVincenzi, A., 
Blackshaw, M., and Ishii, H. Direct and gestural 
interaction with relief: a 2.5D shape display.  In TEI  ’10, 
ACM Press (2010), 221 –222. 
19. Martinez, R. V., Fish, C.R., Chen, X., and Whitesides, 
G.M. Elastomeric Origami: Programmable Paper -
Elastomer Composite s as Pneumatic Actuators. Advanced 
Functional Materials 22 , 7 (2012), 1376–1384. 
20. Murata, S., Yoshida, E., Tomita, K., Kurokawa, H., 
Kamimura, A., and Kokaji, S. Hardware design of 
modular robotic system. In IROS ’10, IEEE/RSJ (2010), 
2210–2217.  
21. Park, Y., Chen, B., and Wood, R. Soft artificial skin 
with multimodal sensing capability using embedded 
liquid conductors. IEEE Sensors, 12, 8 (2012), 2711-
2718. 
22. Park, Y., Chen, B., and Wood, R. Design and 
Fabrication of Soft Artificial Skin Using Embedded 
Microchannels and Liquid Conductors. Sensors Journal, 
IEEE 12, 8 (2012), 2711–2718. 
23. Park, Y.-L., Majidi, C., Kramer, R., Bérard, P., and 
Wood, R.J. Hyperelastic pressure sensing with a liquid-
embedded elastomer. Journal of Micromechanics and 
Microengineering 20, 12 (2010), 125029. 
24. Paul Jackson. Folding techniques for designers. 
Laurence King Publishers, 2011.  
25. Qin, D., Xia, Y., and Whitesides, G.M. Soft lithography 
for micro- and nanoscale patterning. Nature protocols 5, 3 
(2010), 491–502. 
26. Rasmussen, M., Pedersen, E., Petersen, M., and 
Hornbæk, K. Shape-changing interfaces: a review of the 
design space and open research questions. In CHI ’12, 
ACM (2012), 735–744. 
27. Roudaut, A., Karnik, A., Löchtefeld, M., and 
Subramanian, S. Morphees   : Toward High “ Shape 
Resolution ” in Self- Actuated Flexible Mobile Devices. In 
CHI ’13, ACM (2013), 593–602. 
28. Rekimoto, J. SmartSkin: an infrastructure for freehand 
manipulation on interactive surfaces. In CHI ’02, ACM 
(2002), 113–120. 
29. S.D. Guest, S. Pellegrino. The Folding of Triangulated 
Cylinders, Part 1: Geometric consideration. J. Appl. 
Mech. 1994. 61(4): 773-777. 
30. S. Vogel, Life in Moving Fluids: The Physical Biology 
of Flow. Grant, 1981. 
31. Sergio, M., Manaresi, N., and Tartagni, M. A  Textile 
Based Capacitive Pressure Sensor. Sensors, 2002. 1625–
1630. 
32. Shepherd, R.F., Ilievski, F., Choi, W., et al. Multigait 
soft robot. In PNAS ’11. 108, 51 (2011), 20400 –3. 
33. Slyper, R., Poupyrev, I., and Hodgins, J. Sensing 
through structure: designing soft silicone sensors . In  
TEI  ’11, ACM (2011), 213 - 220. 
34. Steltz, E., Mozeika, A., Rembisz, J., Corson, N., and 
Jaeger, H.M. Jamming as an enabling technology for soft 
robotics. In SPIE Smart ’10. 
35. Stevenson, A., Perez, C., and Vertegaal, R. An 
inflatable hemispherical multi -touch display. In TEI  ’11, 
ACM (2011), 289–292. 
36. Thomus Hull. Project Origami: Activities for Exploring 
Mathematics. A K Peters/CRC Press, 2006. 
37. Vertegaal, R., and Poupyrev, I. Organic User Interfaces. 
Communications of the ACM. 51, 6 (2008), 26–30.