PneuBots: Modular Inflatables for Playful Exploration of Soft
Robotics
Hye Jun Youn
Harvard Graduate School of Design
hyoun@gsd.harvard.edu
Ali Shtarbanov
MIT Media Lab
alims@media.mit.edu
Figure 1: The PneuBots kit features (a) 7 inflatable modules, (b) 3 types of pneumatic connectors, and (c) a custom-designed
package. Some of the dynamic assemblies possible with PneuBots, in combination with FlowIO Platform, include (d) a rolling
robot, (e, f) different artistic designs, (g) a self-assembled ball, (h) a haptic bracelet, and (i) an interactive flower.
ABSTRACT
PneuBots is a modular soft robotics construction kit consisting of 
seven types of self-foldable segments with high tensile strength, 
three types of pneumatic connectors and splitters, and a custom-
designed box. The kit enables various assemblies to be made with 
the modu-lar pieces, allowing creators to explore the world of 
soft robotics in playful ways. When combined with a FlowIO 
device, PneuBots allows seamless programmability of the 
different assemblies, en-abling artists, designers, engineers, and 
makers to create dynamic, shape-changing, and interactive
 works 
that can be used for educa-tion, storytelling, dynamic art, or 
expression of affect and gratitude. In this paper, we present our 
current progress towards developing a soft robotics starter kit that 
is affordable, modular, programmable, and adaptable to users’ 
creative visions. Finally, we discuss some of our preliminary 
results with users who had the opportunity to try using PneuBots.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9156-6/22/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3514490
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human Computer Interaction (HCI) ; • User Interface
Toolkits;
KEYWORDS
Soft Robotics, Construction kit, Pneumatics, Shape changing inter-
faces, Inflatables, Design, Art, Interactivity, Modularity, Education
ACM Reference Format:
Hye Jun Youn and Ali Shtarbanov. 2022. PneuBots: Modular Inflatables for
Playful Exploration of Soft Robotics. In CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts), April
29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3514490
1 INTRODUCTION
Constructive assemblies and modular toolkits [1, 2] provide a low-
barrier way for people to be exposed to a new field, learn about
advanced concepts through a creative and playful approach, and
rapidly start applying their creative skills within a given domain
even without any prior exposure to that domain. One example
of a constructive assembly is Topobo [
3], which was designed to
teach children about physics and enable them to make biomorphic
Hye Jun Youn and Ali ShtarbanovCHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
forms that can record and replay motion. LEGO Mindstorms1 is an-
other example that allows people to rapidly start prototyping basic 
robots and learn advanced concepts about the design, actuation, 
and motion of robots even without any prior exposure to robot-
ics. Similarly, electronic modules like those from Sparkfun2 and 
Adafruit3 can also be viewed from the perspective of constructive 
assemblies. They allow makers, even without any prior electron-
ics design background, to quickly build advanced projects just by 
purchasing pre-made electronic modules and development boards, 
and then reading a quick tutorial about how to connect and pro-
gram them. Moreover, while working with such electronic modules, 
makers gradually begin learning advanced electronics concepts.
Soft robotics is an emerging and rapidly accelerating field with 
a very high potential for impact, which is also of strong interest 
to the Human Computer Interaction (HCI) and Haptic communi-
ties [4]. Yet the barriers to entry for most researchers and makers 
are still very high, and those barriers are even greater for people 
who come from nontechnical backgrounds. Learning about soft 
robotics fabrication techniques became even more difficult in the 
wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. That’s because most fabrication 
and prototyping processes necessitate expensive materials that 
are not readily available in most countries, space for molding and 
casting, computer aided design (CAD) skills, and access to equip-
ment such as 3D printers. Additionally, the actuation and sensing 
of soft robots requires advanced skills in pneumatics, engineer-
ing, and programming. Websites such as softroboticstoolkit.com, 
opensoftmachines.com, and softrobotics.io offer a variety of re-
sources related to soft robotics research and prototyping. However, 
while such online resources offer a great starting point, reading 
and watching videos alone does not allow for people to actually 
develop intuition about soft robots and to use the creative learning 
process of learning through doing and playing.
On the other hand, a constructive assembly kit in combination 
with carefully curated informational resources could significantly 
reduce the barrier to entry and allow people to easily get started 
with soft robotics, prototype basic interactions, develop intuition 
about the behavior and control of such robots, and be inspired and 
motivated to go beyond the offering of a kit. Currently, there are 
only few examples of such kits related to this field, and most of 
them are only research prototypes, not readily available to people. 
Chao Zhang et.al. [5] wrote a comprehensive review paper in 2020 
on modular soft robots that also lists nearly all known soft robotics 
construction kits. Two examples of reconfigurable soft robotic kits 
include InflatiBits [6] and Soft LEGO [7].
Here we present a novel soft robotics construction starter kit, 
called PneuBots, made from durable, low-cost inflatable materials. 
The PneuBots project is an expression of gratitude for the privileges 
and opportunities we have to pursue research in an exciting emerg-
ing field and collaborate with people from diverse backgrounds. 
Through this low-cost project, we are providing similar opportu-
nities to more people, including those who may not have such 
privileges or access to advanced resources. PneuBots includes a 
variety of building blocks with different actuation behaviors and 
comes with a FlowIO Platform [8] that allows even novice users
1www.lego.com/en-us/themes/mindstorms
2www.sparkfun.com
3www.adafruit.com
without any programming or electronics background to create soft
robots with dynamic interactions and bring their creations to life.
Moreover, this physical prototyping toolkit even allows users to
express and share their own gratitude through applications such as
a hugging robot, an affective device like AuxeticBreath [10] that
metaphorically expresses emotion through a rhythmic pattern, in-
teractive flowers that can serve as gifts for loved ones, or ghostly
presence interfaces for those who are far away or are isolated in
quarantine. Additionally, PneuBots starter kit can also be used for
numerous educational, storytelling, or artistic purposes.
2 DESIGN PROCESS
2.1 Design Research
In our design process we used a mixed method comprising inter-
views and existing product reviews. We started by concentrating 
on creators interested in working on soft robotics projects. In par-
ticular, our initial target user group consisted of graduate students 
new to this field. In the future, we will also include un-
dergraduate and k-12 students. Over the course of developing this 
project, we informally interacted with 20 graduate students who 
provided feedback about the behaviors and interactions they want 
to achieve with soft robotic design concepts, and who also shared 
some of the barriers and obstacles that prevent them from realizing 
their goals. The primary challenges reported by the students  
included lack of equipment, complexity of developing a suitable 
control system, and difficult in implementing control algorithms. 
We depict these design research findings in Figure 2 where we 
group them into three categories: desired compound behaviors, 
desired primitive actions, and barriers & challenges faced.
Figure 2: The green and red bubbles show the behaviors
and primitive actions that graduate students were interested
in achieving with soft robots, while the blue bubbles show
the challenges and barriers preventing them from achieving
those goals.
PneuBots: Modular Inflatables for Playful Exploration of Soft Robotics CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
Figure 3: PneuBots includes modules for (a) 1-axis bending, (b) 2-axis bending, (c) half bending, (d) axial contraction,(e) 
twisting, and (f, g) two modules with radial expansion serving as base connectors for the other modules
Based on the aforementioned design research, we designed a 
set of origami-inspired modular primitives for the PneuBots kits 
that achieve the desired primitive actions. Figure 3 shows the set 
of seven modules developed to date. Additional modules may be 
added later. The modules can be combined together seamlessly to 
allow makers to quickly assemble different kinds of structures that 
can then achieve complex dynamic behaviors. A FlowIO device [8] 
is also included in the kit to allow users to seamlessly actuate and 
program the behavior of their soft robot assemblies without having 
to learn advanced engineering or programming skills.
2.2 Self-Folding Design
The PneuBots kit contains modular self-folding blocks that actuate 
when air is pumped in, which are shown on Figure 3. We used a 
design and fabrication process very similar to the one described in 
[9] for creating structures fabricated out of sheet materials with 
heat-sealed hinges that fold when inflated. Four hinge types (in-
ner patterns) were used to achieve different bending behaviors: 
linear, diagonal, diamond, and wide diamond (Figure 4). A module 
with a linear pattern has a 5mm gap in the middle of each 
straight line, which causes axial contraction during actuation. 
As the volume of the inflatable increases, the length of the 
linear pattern gap decreases and the height increases (Figure 3). 
The diamond shape-hinge serves as the bending angle control. 
The seam will continue to curve, and the hinge continue to 
bend, until the volume in the inflat-able is maximized. Lastly, 
the diagonal pattern with a 5mm gap serves as the curling 
control, which is useful for changing the orientation of connected 
modules. Seven PneuBots modules with different actuation 
behaviors - including shrinking, curling and bending - were 
designed. Two of those modules, the star-shaped and triangle-
shaped, don’t have any hinges and thus have no folding action under 
actuation.
Figure 4: Four inner design patterns corresponding to four
different types of actuation behaviors.
2.3 Modularity
The different design patterns heat-sealed on the modular blocks
constrain their deformation to yield a specific shape change under
inflation. Each of the modules can be connected to one or more
identical or different modules, thus enabling a diverse range of con-
figurations, structures, and applications to be explored seamlessly
Hye Jun Youn and Ali ShtarbanovCHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
and playfully. Each modular design features small, standardized 
units that can be independently combined in various configurations 
to create different forms and provide multiple functions. Our goals 
for designing modules were to identify what modules will be part 
of the planned system and what their functions  will be; identify 
how different modules will connect to each other; and explore the 
performance of the modules in various arrangements.
2.4 Fabrication Process
The modules of PneuBots were developed by a heat-pressing fabri-
cation process, where two layers of PVC (Polyvinyl Chloride) film 
were sandwiched together and then sealed along specific origami-
inspired patterns. The process of making PneuBots is seamless to 
learn, requires no 3D modeling, and uses inexpensive materials.
The typical heat pressing fabrication method is to first laser cut 
geometric pattern on a paper, then manually stamp it on a semi-
flexible film using a heat press. This isn’t convenient because the 
method creates undesired wrinkles, holes, and irregular linear 
shapes during the manual heat pressing. Therefore, in our mold 
design, we used 1/2-inch-thick bronze block etched using a CNC-
mill to depth of 1/8 inch to create metallic molds. Then, PVC film 
was pressed for 5 seconds at 260°C onto the bronze mold (Figure 
5).
Figure 5: (top). two steps fabrication process: CNC milling 
of desired pattern on a block of bronze and heat pressing of 
a PVC film on the bronze mold (bottom) nine CNC-milled 
bronze molds.
The CNC-milling plus heat pressing fabrication method achieves 
an accurate and smooth geometric pattern without wrinkles. In 
addition, the bronze molds allow consistent patterns useful for mass-
production. The versatility of PVC film and the smooth finishing 
of the seam make the modules resistant to bursting from over-
inflation.
2.5 Connectors
Each PneuBots module has between one and five pneumatic ports 
with oral-inflation-valves that are commonly used on beach balls 
and swimming tubes as shown on Figure 6. Some of the modules 
have more than one port, allowing air to flow in or out from multiple 
holes, and the users can choose which holes are open and which 
they wish to close with the plugs. Modules can be connected to each 
other using three types of pneumatic connectors: Straight-
shaped, T-shaped, and Cross-shaped (Figure 7). (A) Straight 
connectos allow multiple modules to be daisy-chained. (B) The 
T-shaped connector allows for more complicated assemblies. It 
also allows a single module with multiple inflation valves to
connect to another one of its valves, which can be useful for
achieving certain aesthetic outcomes. (C) The Cross-shaped
connector allows up to four modular blocks to be connected to
each other.
Figure 6: (a) Oral inflation valves with plug, (b) T-shaped con-
nector joining two ends of the same module, (c) three modules 
connected with a cross-shaped connector.
Figure 6: Three types of connectors - (a) straight, (b) t-shaped, 
(c) cross-shaped - and example uses of each.
The PneuBots modules can be assembled together as easily as 
LEGOs, and as soon as they are slotted into place they share the 
same air channel. We observed that users of PneuBots used the 
straight connector much more often than the other connectors 
when assembling their own structures. However, the other 
connectors were also used when users chose to make more 
complicated structures.
PneuBots: Modular Inflatables for Playful Exploration of Soft Robotics CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
Figure 8: Various applications developed using materials included in PneuBots a) an artistic work, b) an underwater 
rolling robot, c) garden, d) a gripper, e) a hugging toy, f) an interactive flower, g) a lifting robot, and h) a haptic bracelet.
were then tasked with experimenting and brainstorming possible
uses for the modular blocks (Figure 8). For most users, this was their
first exposure to soft robotics, and in the process, they learned about
pneumatic control, actuation patterns, and heat-sealing fabrication.
Our preliminary evaluation with the students showed that PneuBots
enabled them to playfully create projects including a rolling robot,
a wearable device, a gripper with two arms, and several artistic
creations.
Grasping arms were composed by connecting a minimum of two
modular blocks. The rolling robot was designed using four sim-
ple linear shape modules. Two cylindrical molds were separately
3D printed to connect the modular parts on the top and bottom
sides. Using the five pneumatic I/O ports from FlowIO, students con-
trolled individual modules to generate various motion patterns. The
PneuBots kit also provided aesthetic as well as functional opportuni-
ties for designers and artists. The translucency of PVC film creates
eye-catching objects, and artists and designers created artwork such
as flowers and accessories, as well as internally illuminated objects.
Figure 9: Students inspired by Pneubots making their own
inflatable designs a) cutting a PVC film b) using a heat press
to join two layers of PVC films.
Figure 10: Frequently asked questions about PneuBots 
from users.Inspired by this fabrication method, some graduate design stu-
dents developed inflatable structures with more complicated inner
patterns, which include rectangles, circles, irregular shapes, and
combination of different shapes (Figure 9). PneuBots has been very
useful in helping students understand not only soft robotics and
actuation mechanisms, but also the fabrication process of heating
thin PVC film, sealing methods, and connections between silicone
tubes and modular units.
After providing the modular inflatables to graduate students,
we received several questions and helpful feedback (Figure 10). A
question about ways to obtain the toolkit inspired us to develop a
website for PneuBots (https://www.pneubot.org) which will enable
our toolkit to be available for anyone interested in soft robotics.
Sustainable packaging was also designed to helpfully organize the
modular parts, connectors, and instructions about their use and
function. The box is designed to keep all parts readily accessible
and well-organized (Figure 11).
Figure 11: A sustainable packaging that keeps  all the con-
stituents
 in a well-organized  way.
3 USER TESTS
The PneuBots kit was preliminarily distributed to graduate students 
from backgrounds in architecture, engineering, and education, who 
Hye Jun Youn and Ali Shtarbanov
[1] B. Ullmer and H. Ishii. 2000. Emerging frameworks for tangible user interfaces.
IBM Systems Journal 39, 3.4: 915–931.
[2] Joanne Leong, Florian Perteneder, Hans-Christian Jetter, and Michael Haller. 2017.
What a Life! Building a Framework for Constructive Assemblies. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (TEI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
57–66. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3024969.3024985
[3] Hayes Solos Raffle, Amanda J. Parkes, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2004. Topobo. Proceedings
of the 2004 conference on Human factors in computing systems CHI ’04, ACM
Press, 647–654.
[4] Anke Brocker, Jose A. Barreiros, Kristian Gohlke, Ozgun Kilic Afsar, Ali Shtar-
banov, and Sören Schröder. 2022. Actuated Materials and Soft Robotics Strategies
for Human-Computer Interaction Design. In CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts), April
29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3503711.
[5] Chao Zhang, Pingan Zhu, Yangqiao Lin, Zhongdong Jiao, Jun Zou. Modular
Soft Robotics: Modular Units, Connection Mechanisms, and Applications. In
Advanced Intelligent Systems, February 2020, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1002/
aisy.201900166.
[6] Christopher Kopic and Kristian Gohlke. 2016. InflatiBits: A Modular Soft Robotic
Construction Kit for Children. In Proceedings of the TEI’16: Tenth International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. 723–728. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2872962.
[7] J. Lee, J. Eom, W. Choi and K. Cho, "Soft LEGO: Bottom-Up Design Platform for
Soft Robotics, " 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2018, pp. 7513-7520, doi: 10.1109/IROS.2018.8593546.
[8] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform: The Pneumatic ‘Raspberry
Pi’ for Soft Robotics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513.
[9] Jifei Ou, Mélina Skouras, Nikolaos Vlavianos, Felix Heibeck, Chin-Yi Cheng,
Jannik Peters, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. AeroMorph - Heat-sealing Inflatable Shape-
change Materials for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’16). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 121–132. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1145/2984511.2984520.
[10] Hye Jun Youn. 2021. AuxeticBreath: Changing Perception of Respiration In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and
Embodied Interaction (TEI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 76, 1–4. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3430524.3444636.
4 VISION FOR  PNEUBOTS
Some other  feedback from users mentioned the smooth  surface 
of
 PVC film.  Since the  inflated modular blocks are slippery, the  
smooth texture may not be ideal  for an  interaction with other ob-
jects. Therefore, to extend  PneuBots’ functionality, we are planning 
to
 create a layer of cloth  such as an auxetic  structure to generate  
friction between  modules for more stable mobility.  We will also 
eventually 
broaden the scope of our work to include more 
diversity in modular block design, and we are currently gathering 
data to determine the appropriate number of modular blocks to 
include in our basic package.
REFERENCES
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29–May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
For creative thinkers, designers, and engineers with the problem 
of accessing, understanding, and implementing emerging technolo-
gies such as soft robotics, we develop and produce user-friendly 
interfaces, connecting the dots between academic disciplines and 
more applied solutions in engineering, design, and other hands-on 
fields. Our aim is to support designers, artists, and developers in 
their exploration by providing  them with soft robotics kits that are 
affordable, modular, programmable, and suitable to their creative 
visions. We want to inspire those unfamiliar with soft robotics to 
engage with a new way of thinking about structure and architecture 
and provide them with a straightforward learning and prototyping 
toolkit.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Professor Allen Sayegh, Jonathan Grinham, 
and Chanwoo Choi for providing feedbacks, space and equipment 
and building the PneuBots Kit. Thanks to Harvard Undergraduate 
Venture Capitals for providing funding for building the website and 
for deploying the project.