Touchibo: Multimodal Texture-Changing Robotic Platform for 
Shared Human Experiences 
Yuhan Hu∗ Isabel Neto∗ Jin Ryu 
yh758@cornell.edu isabel.neto@tecnico.ulisboa.pt jfr224@cornell.edu 
Cornell University INESC-ID,University of Lisbon Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY, USA Lisbon, Portugal Ithaca, NY, USA 
Ali Shtarbanov Hugo Nicolau Ana Paiva 
alims@media.mit.edu hugo.nicolau@tecnico.ulisboa.pt ana.paiva@inesc-id.pt 
MIT Media Lab ITI/LARSyS,University of Lisbon INESC-ID,University of Lisbon 
Cambridge, MA, USA Lisbon, Portugal Lisbon, Portugal 
Guy Hofman 
hofman@cornell.edu 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY, USA 
Figure 1: Two platform prototypes: (a) Touchibo Turtle and its (b) internal view; (c) Touchibo Tree and its (d) modular structure. 
ABSTRACT 
Touchibo is a modular robotic platform for enriching interpersonal 
communication in human-robot group activities, suitable for chil-
dren with mixed visual abilities. Touchibo incorporates several 
modalities, including dynamic textures, scent, audio, and light. Two 
prototypes are demonstrated for supporting storytelling activities 
and mediating group conversations between children with and with-
out visual impairment. Our goal is to provide an inclusive platform 
for children to interact with each other, perceive their emotions, 
and become more aware of how they impact others. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Accessibility systems and tools; 
Haptic devices; • Hardware → Emerging interfaces; • Computer 
systems organization → Robotics. 
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
UIST ’22 Adjunct, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA 
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9321-8/22/10. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3526114.3558643 
KEYWORDS 
soft robot; pneumatic; texture; children, human-robot interaction; 
storytelling; multimodal; inclusion; haptics; emotions; platform; 
olfaction; conversational dynamics 
ACM Reference Format: 
Yuhan Hu, Isabel Neto, Jin Ryu, Ali Shtarbanov, Hugo Nicolau, Ana Paiva, 
and Guy Hofman. 2022. Touchibo: Multimodal Texture-Changing Robotic 
Platform for Shared Human Experiences. In The Adjunct Publication of the 
35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 
(UIST ’22 Adjunct), October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA. ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3526114.3558643 
1 INTRODUCTION 
This work presents Touchibo, a robotic platform that enriches chil-
dren’s interactions by generating physical sensations using texture-
changing skins, scents, and lights. 
Similar to how humans convey their emotions in various ways 
including gestures, heartbeat, and sweat, robots could also display 
emotions more diversely through physical expressions [7, 9], includ-
ing auditory (hearing), olfactory (scent), and tactile (touch) [8]. In 
this way, robots also become more accessible and easily perceived 
by participants of diferent age or sensory ability, and especially in 
mixed-visual ability groups where non-visual feedback is of utmost 
importance [1, 6]. 
UIST ’22 Adjunct, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA Hu and Neto, et al. 
While texture change for emotional expression has previously 
been explored without a robotic embodiment [3, 4], integrating 
texture changing modules onto a social robot in a real-world ap-
plication remains fairly unexplored. Combining touch experiences 
with other modalities such as sound, scent, and light also needs 
further exploration. 
We propose a design space for robots’ emotional expressions us-
ing multiple modalities, where participants can share multisensory 
experiences regardless of their visual abilities. In order to demon-
strate the fexibility of Touchibo platform in diferent contexts, we 
present two prototypes: Touchibo Turtle for storytelling activities 
and Touchibo Tree for mediating group conversations. 
2 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
We engaged in a two-month co-design process with four psychol-
ogists, two teachers and one blind teenager. The main goal was 
to create multimodal robots to enhance group activities equally 
perceivable by children with and without visual impairment. This 
section describe three multimodal technologies, including tactile 
(texture-changing skin), visual (lights), and olfactory (scent box). 
Texture-changing Skin. We integrated a dynamic texture-changing 
skin to enrich the tactile sensation and expressiveness of the robot. 
Each soft-skin module comprises a silicone body and air cavity 
that can be pneumatically controlled to generate surface texture 
changes [5]. We designed fve bio-inspired texture shapes (Figure 2, 
row 1, 2): Wrinkles generate haptic tension when vacuumed -
expressing confusion and concentration. Goosebumps express ex-
citement, while spikes display anger and defense with sharp haptic 
tips. Stomata simulates breathing of the robot by opening and 
closing the "pores". Tentacles inspired by sea anemones express a 
sense of liveliness in a robot. A network of air chambers connects 
individual groups of textures for separate control. The textures can 
be uniformly connected and actuated together or separately con-
trolled via multiple channels. Figure 2 (row 3) presents 3-channel 
goosebumps achieving diferent surface dynamics with indepen-
dent control. To control dynamic texture movements, we used a 
FlowIO [10] device. The device allows for independent control of 
fve channels to perform infation, defation, vacuum, and hold -
with pressure sensing as control feedback to achieve pre-calibrated 
deformation. By dynamically controlling the pressure, fow-rate, 
and frequency, we can achieve diferent texture dynamics (Fig. 2 
row 4). 
Light Module. We added a visual communication channel through 
predefned color patterns penetrating the robot’s skin. We embed-
ded LED rings of uniform sizes under the skin units. Lights are 
controlled remotely via WiFi without needing physical wire con-
nections. The wireless connections allow designers to build robots 
with modular/detached bodies, as demonstrated in section 2. 
Scent Box. For smell manipulation, we developed a scent box that 
shifts between a discrete set of smells to enrich a robot’s subtle 
expression. A scent box (Figure 3) is composed of four pieces of 
scented cotton, with the scents of campfre, grass, rain, and dust. 
A mini fan is installed behind each scented cotton. When a fan is 
turned on, the wind blows air through the scented cotton, spreading 
the smell to the environment. 
Figure 2: Design space of texture-changing skin (shape, con-
nection, control amplitude and frequency). 
Figure 3: Composition of a scent box 
3 APPLICATIONS 
Storyteller. Inspired by the mixed visual-ability group and psy-
chologists’ storytelling activities, we designed Touchibo Turtle as 
a storyteller that enacts diferent physical sensations of characters 
such as happiness, sadness, fear, or anger. Its size allows four chil-
dren’s hands to physically and socially explore its nine touch zones. 
As shown in Figure 1 and 2, it has fve evenly distributed texture 
types, providing equal skin type experience per hand and animated 
synchronously. The robot is hidden inside a cave made of fabric 
with sleeves, so children cannot have visual access to the robot and 
Touchibo: Multimodal Texture-Changing Robotic Platform for Shared Human Experiences UIST ’22 Adjunct, October 29-November 2, 2022, Bend, OR, USA 
focus their attention on other senses. In addition, we use audio, 
textures, wind, lights, and scents to create an immersive experience. 
The background music sets the scene and overall mood; silence 
and lights for marking scene-changes and promoting children’s 
curiosity; texture-changing skins to convey diferent feelings; and 
wind to enact the breathing fow. Lastly, scents aid in defning the 
surrounding environment. Future explorations for richer tactile 
sensations can investigate underwater setups and temperature. 
Conversation Companion. Inspired by previous research [2, 11], 
we built Touchibo Tree which becomes afraid of aggressive con-
versations and bored of long monologues so that children can learn 
the impact of their behaviors on others through the robot’s be-
haviour. The robot’s branches embodying tentacles and goose-
bumps with three activation zones (fgure 1). Using frequency, 
amplitude, and texture variation, the robot expresses a breathing 
metaphor: curious (fast breathing), boring (slow breathing), and 
afraid (irregular breathing). In the demo, we present two scenarios: 
(1) the robot displays boredom or curiosity textures in response to 
speaking time, encouraging balanced participation; (2) the robot 
expresses fear with intense texture changes in reaction to high 
volume speech, promoting respectful conversations. In addition, 
the prototype is modular, allowing customized texture combination 
and stand-alone branch separation. By reacting to conversations 
through tangible feedback, we expect the robot to enrich the physi-
cal experience and deepen the social connection within groups. 
4 CONCLUSION 
This work presents a two-month co-design process to build inclu-
sive experiences for mixed-ability groups of children. Given the 
insights into children’s needs, we designed Touchibo platform that 
explores various complementary modalities such as audio, textures, 
wind, scent, and light allowing children with or without visual 
impairment to have shared experiences. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by Portuguese National funds under 
projects UIDB/50009/2020, UIDB/50021/2020, SFRH/BD/06452/2021, 
and National Science Foundation under Grant No.1830471. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cristiana Antunes, Isabel Neto, Filipa Correia, Ana Paiva, and Hugo Nicolau. 2022. 
Inclusive’R’Stories: An Inclusive Storytelling Activity with an Emotional Robot. 
In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction. 90–100. 
[2] G. Hofman, O. Zuckerman, G. Hirschberger, M. Luria, and T. Shani-Sherman. 
2015. Design and Evaluation of a Peripheral Robotic Conversation Companion. In 
2015 10th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). 
3–10. 
[3] Yuhan Hu and Guy Hofman. 2019. Using skin texture change to design emotion 
expression in social robots. In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 2–10. 
[4] Yuhan Hu and Guy Hofman. 2022. What Can a Robot’s Skin Be? Designing 
Texture-Changing Skin for Human-Robot Social Interaction. J. Hum.-Robot 
Interact. (feb 2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3532772 Just Accepted. 
[5] Yuhan Hu, Zhengnan Zhao, Abheek Vimal, and Guy Hofman. 2018. Soft skin 
texture modulation for social robotics. In 2018 ieee international conference on 
soft robotics (robosoft). IEEE, 182–187. 
[6] Isabel Neto, Hugo Nicolau, and Ana Paiva. 2021. Community Based Robot 
Design for Classrooms with Mixed Visual Abilities Children. Proceedings of the 
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2021). https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445135
[7] Lauri Nummenmaa, Enrico Glerean, Riitta Hari, and Jari K. Hietanen. 2014. Bodily 
maps of emotions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 2 (2014), 
646–651. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1321664111 
[8] Shi Qiu, Pengcheng An, Jun Hu, Ting Han, and Matthias Rauterberg. 2020. Un-
derstanding visually impaired people’s experiences of social signal perception 
in face-to-face communication. Universal Access in the Information Society 19, 4 
(2020), 873–890. 
[9] Jelle Saldien, Kristof Goris, Bram Vanderborght, Johan Vanderfaeillie, and Dirk 
Lefeber. 2010. Expressing emotions with the social robot probo. International 
Journal of Social Robotics 2, 4 (2010), 377–389. 
[10] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform–the Pneumatic “Raspberry 
Pi” for Soft Robotics. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. 1–6. 
[11] H. Tennent, S. Shen, and M. Jung. 2019. Micbot: A Peripheral Robotic Object to 
Shape Conversational Dynamics and Team Performance. In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). 133–142. https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2019.8673013 