Pulling, Pressing, and Sensing with In-Flat: Transparent Touch
Overlay for Smartphones
Zhuoming Zhang
zhuoming.zhang@telecom-paris.fr
LCTI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Paris, France
Jessalyn Alvina
jessalyn.alvina@lisn.upsaclay.fr
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria
Orsay, France
Françoise Détienne
francoise.detienne@telecom-paris.fr
i3 UMR 9217-CNRS, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique
de Paris, Paris, France
Eric Lecolinet
eric.lecolinet@telecom-paris.fr
LCTI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Paris, France
Figure 1: In-Flat is a pressure-sensitive silicon overlay on smartphones that enables coupling between visual display and touch
I/O. In-Flat can be used to enhance GUI interactions (a) on buttons to parameterize dynamic emojis; or (b) in games. (c) Each
airbag can have different inflation levels, (d) e.g., enabling dynamic tangible affordances to visualize a breathing lung.
ABSTRACT
Smartphones’ screens are touch-sensitive and offer rich visual out-
put capabilities, but do not allow users to control a wide range of
pressure input nor provide rich pressure sensations. We propose
In-Flat, an input/output pressure-sensitive overlay for smartphones.
In-Flat consists of a transparent inflatable skin-like silicon layer that
can be placed on the top or the back of a smartphone. As an output
device, In-Flat offers tangible affordances and dynamic pressure
feedback coupled with visual display. As an input device,In-Flat en-
ables users to continuously perform a wide range of input gestures,
notably press and pinch-and-pull gestures. Thus, In-Flat can be used
to finely manipulate visual objects in mobile interaction or mediate
interpersonal touch communications. In contrast to previous stud-
ies that mostly focus on press, we investigated the performance of
pinch-and-pull and compared it with press. Our experiment (N=12)
showed that participants could perform pinch-and-pull (83.8%) as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
A VI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9719-3/22/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3531073.3531111
well as press (84.7%), but felt having more control when performing
pinch-and-pull. We explored the use ofIn-Flat to enable multimodal
interaction that couples visual display and touch input/output. Par-
ticipants appreciated this coupling as well as the touch sensation
supplied by the In-Flat device.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing → Haptic devices.
KEYWORDS
Transparent Pneumatic Smartphone Overlay, Visual/Touch I/O In-
terface, Press and Pinch-and-Pull Gestures
ACM Reference Format:
Zhuoming Zhang, Jessalyn Alvina, Françoise Détienne, and Eric Lecolinet.
2022. Pulling, Pressing, and Sensing withIn-Flat: Transparent Touch Overlay
for Smartphones. In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on
Advanced Visual Interfaces (A VI 2022), June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3531073.3531111
1 INTRODUCTION
Touchscreens on smartphones offer high-resolution visual display,
yet lack of the capabilities to generate tactile sensations that are
often present in physical objects. While tactile illusions can be
induced through visual cues [39], they can only influence the ex-
pectation of how the physical objects should feel [4]. More accurate
AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy Zhang et al.
and richer tactile perceptions still require touch interactions with
the objects. Notably, perceiving physical properties like compli-
ance requires dynamic pressure on the object [ 5]. Soft materials
deform under the finger’s pressure and the surface wraps around
the fingertip, inducing more tactile innervation [ 17]. Given that
smartphones’ screens are often flat, rigid, and made of glass, the
pressure sensations on smartphone interactions are limited [10].
Our goal is to augment smartphones’ visual display with rich
touch input and output (I/O) capabilities. As an input device, the
touch overlay should not only enable touch input gestures to inter-
act with the visual objects displayed on the screen, but also provide
bi-directional touch sensations: the users feel the resistance from
the surface as the surface deforms according to the pressure level
they apply onto it. As an output device, the users should be able
not only to see the visual display, but at the same time also perceive
tangible affordances and sense dynamic touch outputs. Addition-
ally, users should be able to have controls over the touch surface
behaviour, including setting up the compliance levels (i.e., how soft
or stiff the touch stimuli should feel when pressured).
While research in HCI has proposed different touch devices,
many of them are designed to provide either input capabilities
only [8, 14, 38], or output capabilities only [ 19, 43]. Some touch
devices provide both I/O capabilities, but also have some limitations
that we attempt to address in this paper. In particular, touch I/O
devices like [13, 27] enable coupling between touch I/O and visual
displays, however they rely on projectors to display the visual cues,
hence reducing the mobility aspect of the device. Touch I/O devices
that can potentially be combined with visual displays on mobile
devices [9, 11, 22] often do not allow in-place touch interactions
that dynamically match the visual objects displayed on the screen.
We propose In-Flat, a pressure-sensitive overlay on smartphones
that couples pressure-based touch I/O with visual display. In-Flat
offers tangible affordances on the visual objects, enabling users
to perceive visual and temporal changes and/or surface compli-
ance levels. In-Flat also enables a variety of touch input gestures
– not only press but also pinch-and-pull gestures. We built a pro-
totype of In-Flat in the form of a detachable phone case with an
inflatable silicon layer (Fig. 1c). Both the silicon layer (front part)
and the phone case (back part) are made of transparent materials,
preserving access to visual display. The touch I/O on each airbag
can be controlled and captured independently, enabling dynamic
multi-finger pressure interactions on the touch overlay.
Our contributions are three folds. First, we propose the design
and prototype of In-Flat, a novel touch I/O device that couples
touch interactions with visual display on smartphones. Second,
we contribute a fabricating approach of highly transparent and
stretchable overlays for smartphones, enabling rich I/O interactions
and skin-like touch sensation. Our explorations on different silicone
materials and fluid options offer technical insights for researchers in
touch interactions. Third, we provided empirical evidence that users
can perform pinch-and-pull as well as press gestures on inflatable
silicon layers with In-Flat. We compared the performance of the
two gestures, complementing past studies on touch devices that
mainly focused on press only [10, 13] or pinch only [31]. We discuss
future directions and implementations for supporting the coupling
between touch I/O and visual displays on smartphones.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Capturing pressure input gestures
Force input (i.e., pressure) is a powerful alternative to mobile inter-
actions as it only requires a finger and fingertip-sized interactive
surfaces (i.e., space-efficient) [8, 10]. Past works have demonstrated
the benefits of force input, including supporting rich and efficient
GUI interactions such as picking values from long ordered list [8]
or selecting parametric commands [6]. Some smartphones enables
force input on touchscreens, for example with iPhone 6s, users can
perform light, medium, or firm press on the screen with a pressure
ranging from 0 to 3.3 Newtons [ 3]. Other smartphones without
pressure sensors capture simulated force input values by calcu-
lating the contact area size between the screen and the fingertip.
Nevertheless, applying pressures on a flat, rigid surface limits the
pressure sensation and the perception of complicity, as the users
can hardly feel the surface bends according to the pressure [10].
Past works have also explored the use of Force Sensing Resis-
tor (FSR) to capture pressure input on smartphones. Wilson et al.
showed that users can choose up to ten items with their fingers at
85% accuracy with continuous visual feedback [38]. Similarly, Heo
and Lee embedded several FSRs on the back of a smartphone to
enable force gesture inputs like slides or drags [14]. In this case, the
gesture recognition process considers the combination of several
touch dimensions, including spatial movements, pressure levels,
and the change of pressure levels over time. Elastic fabrics can also
be used to capture force input [12, 31]. For example, Han et al. cre-
ated an elastic touch interface with fabric and magnet field sensors,
enabling users perform various gestures including pinch-and-pull
[12]. Han et al. also conducted a short pilot study to better design
the pinch-and-pull recognition process. The use of FSR and elastic
fabrics is often limited to support touch input capabilities only.
Another alternative is using silicons with pneumatic activations
and air pressure sensors, as they can be inflated dynamically to gen-
erate touch output as well [11, 13, 22]. Fruchard et al. [10] showed
that controlling high-pressure inputs on soft surfaces (i.e., high
complicity) takes more time and is more prone to errors compared
to on hard surfaces, but more comfortable to perform. Silicons with
pneumatic actuations support continuous pressure input with con-
trollable levels of complicity (i.e., how stiff or soft the material feels
when pressured) [13]. A longitudinal study on the use of inflatable
silicons as a communication medium showed that users could create
personalized touch patterns using the silicons, combining different
pressure levels, the number of press, and temporal variations [22].
With In-Flat, we demonstrated that inflatable silicons can be used
to capture not only press but also pinch-and-pull gestures (Fig. 2).
Our evaluation study complements but differs from past studies,
in that: 1) in contrast to a short pilot done in [31], we conducted a
systematic experiment to evaluate the performance of pinch-and-
pull gestures; and 2) in contrast to previous evaluation studies that
mostly focused on press gestures only [10, 11, 13], we compared
the performance of the press gestures to that of the pinch-and-pull,
and showed that the participants can perform both gestures well.
2.2 Generating touch feedback
Most smartphones already include vibration motors, hence can
generate various tactile feedback [ 37, 41].Past works have also
Pulling, Pressing, and Sensing with In-Flat AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy
explored the possibility of embedding vibrotactile grids on the
back of the smartphone to enable rich vibrotactile feedback for
GUI interactions (e.g., [ 40]) or notifications (e.g., [ 2]). However,
the expressiveness of vibrotactile sensations is limited [ 22, 43].
Alternatively, Maiero et al. [19] explored the use of actuated pins
on the back of the smartphone to provide tactile guidance on visual
objects on the screen. Jang et al. [15] embedded an array of actuated
pins on the edge of the smartphone. Aside from enabling tangible
notifications and tactile guidance, the device can also be used as an
input channel by creating buttons or sliders with the pins.
To enhance touch perceptions such as sensing surface complic-
ity, Feng et al. proposed a fabrication method of inflatable smalls
silicon using full-range speakers [9]. The silicons can be attached
to physical objects such as statues to provide tactile feedback on
fingertips. Similarly, Gohlke et al. proposed an inflatable silicon
button that can both generate touch feedback and capture touch
input when inflated [11]. Their study showed that users can reliably
perceive and recognize touch patterns of different inflation levels
and total activations. Past works have also shown that inflatable sili-
cons can also induce human-like touch sensations that can support
interpersonal touch communications [22, 42]. Complementary but
different from these works,In-Flat can be used to generate dynamic
touch output patterns that augments smartphones’ visual display,
enabling in-place tangible affordances on smartphones.
2.3 Augmenting visual display with touch
Augmenting touchscreens with touch feedback can increase in-
teraction speed, reduce operating errors, and minimize visual and
cognitive load, for example when scrolling [ 24], typing [6], and
interacting with virtual buttons [40], due to enhanced spatial and
temporal perceptions. Beyond enhancing GUI interactions, touch
feedback has also been used to generate pressure sensations to
graphical objects or images [19] and to enhance mobile communi-
cations, for example accompanying emojis with vibrotactile pat-
terns [37]. These tactile systems often spatially decouple the touch
feedback from the virtual objects displayed on the screen to avoid
occlusions and enable full access to the touchscreen capacities.
Meanwhile, past works highlighted the benefits of spatially cou-
pling visual and tactile feedback [13, 43], notable to generate direct
physical feel on virtual objects. The dynamic physical buttons in
[13] uses rear projections to couple touch I/O and visual display,
which not only make them tangible and easier to find, but also pro-
vide bi-directional pressure feedback as the users physically interact
with the buttons. Sahoo et al. also used projectors on an elastic fab-
ric surface to form a tabletop display with touch I/O capabilities
[27]. However, using projectors to generate the visual display may
limit the mobility of the touch device. Instead of projectors, In-Flat
uses the smartphone’s screen as the visual display. Few papers ex-
plored this approach and we tried to address their limitations: [20]
uses a transparent gel overlay that turns opaque when activated,
thus occluding the visual cues; [26] uses transparent silicon, but
only with limited shapes and size (i.e., small buttons).
3 IN-FLAT
We propose In-Flat, a novel visual+touch display with inflatable
silicon layers in the form of a phone case. In-Flat uses transpar-
ent and translucent materials to accommodate visual display. The
silicon layers can be installed on the back of the smartphone to
preserve the screen’s touch input and visual output capabilities;
or as an overlay to enhance the visual output displayed on the
screen with in-place pressure input/output capabilities. A silicon
layer consists of one or more airbags (e.g., 2x4 grid). Each airbag
can capture continuous pressure input independently. As such, a
silicon layer with multiple airbags can enable multi-finger pressure
interactions. Each airbag can also be inflated with different amount
of air (Fig. 1c), enabling dynamic controls over the complicity levels
of the surface. Altogether, it creates a general-purpose visual+touch
display with dynamic pressure I/O capabilities on smartphones.
3.1 Rich touch input patterns
When an airbag is inflated, the surface of the silicon stretches
outwards and enables direct manipulations of the surface. When the
user presses or pulls the silicon surface, the required force to deform
the elastic silicon layer has a positive correlation to its deformation
and has a negative correlation to the volume change. Thus, by
measuring the air pressure change of the airbag, we can measure
different touch forces from users and enable continuous pressure
control. The users can then press the convex silicon surface with
different pressure levels and temporal variations by manipulating the
duration and the gap between presses (Fig. 2). When pressed, the
silicon surface is stretched and the volume of the airbag decreases.
As such, we can combine these touch input dimensions to generate
rich touch patterns on In-Flat. Users can also pinch and pull the
silicon surface with two fingers and have different touch patterns.
3.2 Tangible dynamic touch output
As the overlay is transparent, In-Flat enables visual+touch display
with tangible feedback. When inflated, the silicon surface deforms
according to the amount of air injected into the airbag (Fig. 1c). By
dynamically parameterizing the inflation levels and the temporal
variations, we can create in-place dynamic inflation effects like
breathing (slowly inflating and deflating the airbag) or vibrating
(inflating to a certain level first, and then switching to a series of
inflations and deflations in a high frequency). In-Flat also enables
skin-like touch sensations with different complicity levels. When
Figure 2: Examples of touch input patterns with different
pressure levels and temporal variations. (a) Pressing with
different pressure levels. (b) A long press. (c) A combinations
of pinch-and-pull input patterns.
AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy Zhang et al.
Figure 3: (a) The structure of In-Flat. (b) Transparent case. (c)
Comparing resin before and after nitrocellulose coating.
the user presses its surface, a pressure is exerted to the airbag and
the air inside the touched airbag gets compressed. Thus, the tension
of the silicon and the pressure difference between the airbag and the
atmospheric pressure give a force feedback to the fingertip. Thus,
we can control the compliance level dynamically (i.e., how soft
or stiff the surface is when pressured), and the users can perceive
different sensations. Altogether, In-Flat enhances both visual and
touch perceptions of a visual object displayed on the screen.
4 IMPLEMENTATION AND DESIGN CHOICES
In-Flat consists of two parts: 1) the transparent screen overlay +
transparent resin case; and 2) the inflation and pressure control. In
this section, we describe our design and fabrication approach.
4.1 Fabrication approach
4.1.1 Soft and transparent overlay. Material choice. As an overlay,
In-Flat requires materials that are easy-to-get, transparent, stretch-
able, robust, soft, and skin-contact friendly. Different materials have
been explored in the literature: latex [13, 22, 31], silicon [42], PE
sheets [32], or spandix [12, 31]. Latex is robust and highly stretch-
able, but the transparency is not high enough to allow visibility
when placed on top of the screen. PE sheet is highly transparent,
but non-elastic. We saw the potential of using silicons thanks to its
stretchability, robust, diversity and bio-capability. Spandix is also
robust and highly stretchable, and spandix fabrics can also be seen
through. But its transparency is still limited, and the mesh structure
of spandix fabrics does not support inflatable applications.
Silicons are often used to induce skin-like sensations [ 22, 42].
Thus, we explored different types of silicon to make the inflatable
layer. Ecoflex series are highly stretchable (elongation at break:
845% [29]) and durable, but the transparency cannot support screen
overlay interactions (Fig. 5e). SORTA-Clear series have a high trans-
parency (Fig. 5a), even though they are not as stretchable (elon-
gation at break: 425% [30]) as Ecoflex series, its stretchability can
already meet the requirements for screen overlay interaction. Ad-
ditionally, it can also provide a skin-like touch sensation to the
users. We chose skin-safe SORTA-Clear 18 (100% Modulus: 35psi
[30]) as the material of the inflatable layer. We set the thickness
of the inflation layer to 1.5mm (Fig. 4b) after exploring the elastic
modulus of different thickness of SORTA-Clear 18 silicon.
Composite structure. When In-Flat is placed on the smartphone,
the deformation of the airbag should only face outwards. Thus,
we designed a two-layer composite structure. First, we created the
inflatable silicon layer with a 3D-printed mold. The silicon layer
is created using a mold that printed by a PLA 3D printer. To in-
crease the smoothness of the silicon airbag with current laboratory
Figure 4: Composite structure of the airbags. (a) Two-layer
structure. (b) Uni-directional inflation with 1.5mm thick sil-
icone layer. (a) Inflation with 0.8mm thick silicone layer.
equipment, we pasted a layer of plastic tape to the surface of the
printed PLA mold (Fig. 5a). After that, we glued the silicon layer to
a screen-protection glass with silicon rubber adhesive (ref: Sil-Poxy).
As such, when the air volume changes, the airbag’s deformation
only happens on the silicon side (i.e., outwards) (Fig. 4).
4.1.2 Transparent case. In-Flat can also be placed on the back of the
smartphone to enable back-of-device interactions. With this setting,
the screen of smartphone is faced towards the rigid phone case.
Similar to the selection of silicons, the transparency is crucial to
ensure visibility. Thus, we fabricated a phone case using a resin 3D
printer, with built-in air channels in the case to avoid tubes (Fig. 3c).
We then applied a thin layer of transparent nitrocellulose coat on
the surface of resin case to increase the transparency (Fig. 3d).
4.1.3 Inflation medium. We can potentially inflate the grid with
different fluids. Previous research explored different fluids for in-
flatable touch devices, including air [ 13, 22, 42], water [18], and
other specialty fluids [35]. In-Flat requires a high transparency level
and high response speed, so we explored the use of water and air
to actuate the device. Comparing these two fluids, water can be
considered as non-compressible liquid in In-Flat pressure range,
which lead to a high response speed. However, due to the high
refractive index of water, the water-inflated silicon bag works as a
plano-convex lens and deforms the content on the screen (Fig. 5c).
Finally, we chose air as the inflation medium in our design (Fig. 5b).
4.2 Pneumatic control
4.2.1 Actuators. To ensure accurate inflation levels and pressure
input recognition, we implemented a closed-loop inflation/deflation
system for each airbag. For example, for a silicon layer with 2x4
grid, the 8 airbags of In-Flat are actuated with a 12V DC vacuum
pump (ref: WP36C). The inflation and deflation air flow are equally
distributed into 2x8 flows and controlled separately by 2x8 DC
solenoid valves (ref: CJA V08-2B05A). The solenoid valves are pow-
ered by two 8-channel relay boards and controlled by a 16-channel
PWM motor driver (ref: PCA9685).
4.2.2 Pressure detection and inflation control. To enable continuous
input, the accuracy and speed of touch input detection is crucial.
Different technologies have been explored to detect touch [10, 33],
Figure 5: Different fabrication methods of silicon airbags: (a)
using SORTA-Clear 18 and fabricated with tape-covered PLA
mold; (b) inflated with air; (c) filled with water; (d) fabricated
with 3D printed PLA mold directly; (e) using Ecoflex 20.
Pulling, Pressing, and Sensing with In-Flat AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy
but none of these can be used in our case considering the high
requirement of transparency of the screen overlay. To this end, we
used air pressure to detect the touch forces (as done in previous
works [22, 32]) and built a force-detection system with 8 air pressure
sensors (ref: XGZP6847A) with a sample rate of 40Hz. The sensors
are directly connected to the silicon tubes that transport the air
to the phone case. When the user touches the airbags, they are
deformed and the pressure changes accordingly. As the sensors
and the airbags are communicating vessels, the air pressure stays
the same all the time. Thus, by detecting the pressure value in the
airbags, we can get the equivalent touch pressure indirectly. When a
airbag is inflated to a certain level, the inflation and deflation valves
are closed to ensure air impermeability. Furthermore, we added
close-loop pressure control. When the current pressure is outside
the desired value range, the inflate or deflate valve is activated
until the targeted pressure value is obtained. The real-time pressure
value is sent to the interface and used for pressure-related control.
5 APPLICATION AND USE CASES
We illustrate potential use cases that leverage In-Flat’s capabilities
to generate in-place dynamic output, to capture rich touch input
patterns, and to support skin-like touch perception on smartphones.
Enhancing GUI interaction. In-Flat enables continuous pres-
sure input, which can be mapped to GUI elements on smartphones,
adding one additional dimension to the input channel. For example,
In-Flat can be used for controlling the scroll bar: a pinch-and-pull
would scroll up the page while a press would scroll it down. We can
then map the pressure level to the speed of scrolling: the harder
the user presses/pulls the airbag, the faster the page scrolls.
Enhancing bimanual interaction. In-Flat can support biman-
ual interactions when the silicon layer is put on the back of the
device. This can be particularly useful when the users use an applica-
tion that requires a full screen real estate. For example, productivity
apps like Google Doc display the content (i.e., the text) and the
keyboard, but the users also need to access the menu from time to
time. Instead of making them go back and forth between typing and
accessing the menu, with In-Flat, some airbags can be inflated to
signify the available pop-up menus or widgets. As the users presses
an airbag on the back of the smartphone, a pop-up/widget menu
appears, and she selects the desired menu item. The pop-up menu
disappears as soon as she releases her finger from the airbag.
Expressive interpersonal communication.As one of the most
important non-verbal communication channels, touch plays an es-
sential role in interpersonal affective communication. In addition
to the commonly-used visual and audio channels, In-Flat allows
users to generate and send touch input patterns to each other with
expressive skin-like sensation, as opposed to vibrations in current
smartphones that do not resemble human-like touch [22, 42]. As an
example, when the user is having a phone conversation by holding
the phone against the face, In-Flat can generate pressure patterns
such as a caress, a poke, or a vibration on the cheek to express dif-
ferent emotions, as demonstrated in POKE [22]. If In-Flat’s silicon
layer is placed on the back of device, when the users are having
a video chat by holding the phone with one hand and contact the
palm with the overlay, they can also send touch gestures like stroke,
hit, pat, caress to each other’s palm (Fig. 6a). This functionality can
also be used when there is no verbal communication going on.
Parametric and tangible emojis.Past work has proposed tools
that parameterize dynamic emojis through typing input varia-
tions [1]. Similarly, In-Flat’s continuous pressure input can be used
to parameterize dynamic emojis (Fig. 1a). The emoji can be sent
along with its pressure values (i.e., visual emoji enriched with in-
flated airbags). As such, the receivers can also dynamically interact
with the emoji by pressing or pinching the corresponding inflated
airbags, which will animate the visual emoji.
Expressive tangible notifications. In-Flat can support tangi-
ble notification systems. The tangibility increases the expressivity
of the notification, for exampleIn-Flat displays a breathing inflation
pattern to notify the arrival of a message, with the inflation level
changes depending on the importance of the message. The users
can perceive the expressive notifications from afar without reading
what is written on the screen. Conversely, a user receiving a call
notification can press the airbag to hang up, or pinch-and-pull to
send a preset quick reply to the caller.
Supporting visually-impaired users. Thanks to its tangible
feedback, In-Flat can support eyes-free interactions, offering an
alternative interaction channel for the visually-impaired users. Sim-
ilar to the approach proposed by Rantala et al. [25], In-Flat can be
used to display Braille outputs and to input Braille characters.
Interactive games. The gaming experience could be enhanced
by combining visual, audio, and touch feedback. For example, in
the "catch-a-cat" game (similar to the "whack-a-mole" game), a cat
appears at a random place and the corresponding airbag inflates
accordingly (Fig. 6b). Users can perform press and pinch-and-pull
gesture on the corresponding airbag. The cat will emit a pleasant
sound on a gentle press, a scream on a pinch-and-pull, a loud sound
and run away on a strong press. The airbags inflates or deflates
accordingly. In-Flat can also enhance musical gaming experience
such as drumming (Fig. 1b). The pressure level and temporal varia-
tions can be mapped to the drum’s percussion and rhythm.In-Flat’s
overlay can also be used as gaming console buttons (Fig.6c).
Displaying objects with tangible properties.In-Flat provides
tangible feedback that lets the user perceive the physical and the
temporal property of a visual object (e.g., compliance, rhythm). For
example, in the case of a remote medical consultation, the user
can communicate his lung breathing via In-Flat, while the doctor
can see the lung movement and touch the overlay to perceive the
breathing remotely and directly with their finger (Fig. 1d).
Figure 6: (a) Users can send each other social touch gestures
like a pat in the palm, and the airbag of In-Flat will inflate
accordingly. (b) Interactive game "catch-a-cat". (c) In-Flat’s
overlay can include different shapes of airbags.
AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy Zhang et al.
6 EV ALUATION
Considering our goal to augment smartphones’ touchscreens with
rich touch input and output (I/O) capabilities via In-Flat interface,
it is important to evaluate if users can perform continuous pressure
input with In-Flat and the visual+touch output can enhance mobile
interactions. Our goals were 1) to assess quantitatively if users can
perform both pinch-and-pull and press input gestures with In-Flat;
2) to probe on user perception on the coupling between touch I/O
and visual display qualitatively. To this end, we conducted a two-
stage study: 1) an experiment on continuous input control where
participants played a game similar to "Flappy bird" [36]; 2) a semi-
structured interview where participants explored four pre-designed
demo applications of In-Flat and then shared their perceptions.
6.1 Evaluation Design
6.1.1 Stage 1: Controlled experiment on continuous input control.
The experiment was a [2x6] within-participant design with one
primary factor InputTechnique (pinch-and-pull and press) and one
secondary factor PressureLevel (Level 1 to 6). The game was inspired
by “Flappy bird” [36], in which the players need to control the
movement of a bird so that it flies through a small gap between
pipes (Fig. 7). We chose game tasks as opposed to more abstract tasks
to highlight the visual+touch coupling and increase the ecological
validity of the study. In our game, the bird always flies on the left
side of the screen while the pairs of pipes move towards the bird
with a uniform speed (80 pixels per second). The participants only
needed to position the bird on the correct height (i.e., movement
on y-axis): press the airbag to fly down, pinch-and-pull to fly up.
Past studies showed that users can accurately control pressure
input with 10±2 different levels [7, 21, 38]. Similarly, we tested 13
pressure levels: Level 1 to 6 of press; Level 1 to 6 of pinch-and-pull;
and Level 0 when no input gesture was captured (i.e., baseline).
The experiment consisted of three blocks of 12 trials: BLOCK-1 of
6 PressureLevel x 2 replications of pinch-and-pull; BLOCK-2 of 6x2
trials of press; and BLOCK-3 of 12 mixed trials ofpinch-and-pull and
press. The order of PressureLevel was counter balanced using Latin
Square across participants.BLOCK-3 was always the last block. Half
of the participants started with BLOCK-1 and the other half with
BLOCK-2. Each participant completed 36 trials.
6.1.2 Stage 2: Semi-structured interview on user perception. We de-
signed and presented 3 demo applications described in Section 5 to
participants: 1) the "catch-a-cat" game (Fig. 6b); 2) touch communi-
cation with the silicon layer placed on the back of the smartphone
Figure 7: The parameters of the experiment interface and
the illustration of the targets in Stage 1.
(Fig. 6a); and 3) dynamic visual and tangible feedback presented
as an animated breathing lung (Fig. 1d). Finally, we prompted on
the generalizability of In-Flat where other shapes of airbags were
presented to the participants, and they were asked to reflect what
kind of interaction they might have with these different shapes
of airbags, and what other shapes of airbags they might needed
in interaction. The shapes presented in the study were 9-button
keyboard layout, a cross, a circle and two opposite triangles (Fig. 6c).
6.2 Participants and Apparatus
We recruited twelve participants (3 women, 9 men, 24-43 years old,
median age 28.5). All participants used their right hand to interact
with their smartphones in daily life. We used a OnePlus 5T smart-
phone with the interface displayed full screen (on 300 x 600 pixels).
The game and the demos were web-based apps, connected with
In-Flat through WiFi. For each participant, the calibrated pressure
value for maximum press, maximum pinch-and-pull, and the base-
line pressure were recorded and used throughout the session. The
game also logged the distance between the bird and the target red
line. The data were measured and recorded every 25ms.
6.3 Procedure
Following the health protocol, participants sat behind a desk in a
wide meeting room with opened windows, with In-Flat placed on
the desk. We disinfected the surface of In-Flat device before each
session. All the participants read and signed the informed consent.
Stage 1 started with the calibration session: the participants were
asked to perform the press and pull gesture with the maximum
strength they will likely use in mobile interaction with the hand
they used in their daily mobile interaction. For each gesture, we
mapped the maximum pressure value to Level 6. The pressure value
when no input was performed was mapped to Level 0. The mapping
of the other levels (Level 1 to 5) was equally distributed in between
the pressure values of Level 0 and 6. We then divided the screen’s
height into 13 rows and mapped each pressure level to each row
(the middle point of a row was illustrated as a grey line in Fig. 7).
We also drew a dotted red line to give a visual guideline on the path
the participants needed to follow (Fig. 7). After passing through the
pair of pipes, the participants can lift their finger to rest.
We included a training session where they could practice playing
the game (5 minutes). In the testing session, the participants were
asked to perform all three blocks of trials as accurately and stably
as possible. After performing all the trials, we asked them to share
their experience of using In-Flat as input device in this game. Stage
1 took around 25 minutes. In Stage 2, the participants were asked
to play around each of the demo while thinking aloud and to share
their perception after each demo. Stage 2 took around 25 minutes.
6.4 Measurement
To better evaluate the user performance of each input gesture, we
divided the target path (i.e. the dashed red line in Fig. 7) into 3 parts:
the preparation phase (part 1), the test phase (part 2, 3 and 4) and the
exit phase (part 5). We measured: 1) success rate, the percentage of
successfully completed trials (i.e., the distance between the bird’s
position and the red line is always lower than half of the bird size);
2) accuracy, the average distance between the location of the center
Pulling, Pressing, and Sensing with In-Flat AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy
of the bird and the red line; and 3) stability, the standard deviation
of the distance between the center of the bird and the red line. We
then performed the statistical analysis using JMP [16] with REML
method followed by a post-hoc analysis with Tukey HSD.
6.5 Quantitative Results
6.5.1 Participants performed pinch-and-pull gestures as well as
press gestures. The success rate for press and pinch-and-pull were
84.7% and 83.8% respectively. Given that the pinch-and-pull ges-
tures were a relatively new interaction technique, we were sur-
prised to find that there was no significant effect of InputTechnique
(F1,11=0.05, p=0.82) onsuccess rate. PressureLevel (F5,55=1.36, p=0.23)
and BlockID (F2,22=0.84, p=0.43) also did not have any significant
effect on success rate. We also did not find any significant effect of
InputTechnique on the input accuracy (i.e., the average distance be-
tween the bird and the target path), neither during the preparation
phase (F1,11=1.44, p=0.23), the test phase (F1,11=2.59, p=0.11), nor
the exit phase (F1,11=2.43, p=0.12). Similarly, there was no signifi-
cant effect ofInputTechnique on the input stability (i.e., the standard
deviation of the distance) during the preparing phase (F1,11=1.32,
p=0.25), test phase (F1,11=2.93, p=0.09) and exit phase (F1,11=1.88,
p=0.17). This suggested that the participants could perform pinch-
and-pull gestures as accurately and as stably as press gestures.
We suspected there was a possibility that this result was im-
pacted by some failed trials in which the participant gave up right
away and released their finger(s) once the bird hit the pipe. Hence,
we performed another analysis with the successful trials only (84%
of total trials). The statistical analysis yielded similar results forsuc-
cess rate and accuracy. The only difference was a significant effect
of InputTechnique on the stability during the test phase (F1,11=21.7,
p<0.0001). That said, the difference between the two standard devia-
tions was rather small (only 0.25 pixels:SD P I N C H−AN D −PU LL =1.82
pixels and SD P RES S =1.57 pixels), so we can still conclude that the
participants performed pinch-and-pull as well as press gestures.
6.5.2 Performing the highest level of pinch-and-pull gestures was
more challenging. Although PressureLevel did not have a signifi-
cant effect on success rate (F5,55=1.36, p=0.24), the success rates
for PressureLevel=6 for both InputTechnique were lower than the
other five levels: 76% for overall success rate, 72.2% and 80.6% for
pinch-and-pull and press respectively. We also found a significant
effect of PressureLevel on both the average distance and the standard
deviation of distance during all three phases (all p<0.05). A post-hoc
analysis with Tukey HSD revealed that Level 6 had significantly
higher average distance (i.e., accuracy) and standard deviation of
distance (i.e., stability) in all three phases. There might be two pos-
sible explanations for this result: 1) As the distance the bird needs
to travel from the baseline to the target location in Level 6 was the
largest (Fig. 7), it required more physical preparations to perform
the gestures, resulting in lower performance; 2) The participants
might have performed the input gesture as intensely as possible
to reach the top or the bottom of the screen for Level 6 as they
knew that these trials required the largest amount of force, hence,
reducing the accuracy and the stability.
To summarize, given that we calibrated the maximum pressures
(i.e., Level 6) for each gesture based on each participant’s maximum
"comfortable" pressures, the data suggested that while they were
Figure 8: (a) The average distance and (b) the standard devi-
ation for all PressureLevel in all three phases.
still able to perform successfully, the accuracy and the stability
might be slightly compromised. This can be potentially reduced by
imposing a better calibration session: instead of performing just
one pressure input and record its value as the maximum pressure
level (as done in our current experiment design), we can ask the
participants to perform several pressure inputs and record their
average or median value as the maximum pressure level. Their
perception of maximum "comfortable" pressure might also change
over time as they get more used to the interaction.
6.5.3 More preparation was needed when the participants switched
between pinch-and-pull and press gestures. BLOCK-1 only consisted
of pinch-and-pull, BLOCK-2 only press, while BLOCK-3 consisted
of both gestures in a mixed order. We found that BlockID had a
significant effect on the average distance (F2,22=24.6, p<0.0001) and
the standard deviation of distance (F2,22=33.6, p<0.0001) during the
preparation phase, as well as on the standard deviation of distance
during the exit phase (F2,22=6.32, p=0.002). A post-hoc analysis on
the three conditions revealed that the performance was signifi-
cantly lower for BLOCK-3 than for the other blocks. There might
be two possible explanations. First, given that in BLOCK-3 the
pinch-and-pull and press gestures were mixed, some participants
might constantly switch their finger position between pinch-and-
pull with two fingers and press with one finger, making performing
the gesture more challenging. Second, with 12 different pressure
levels (i.e., 6 levels each for pinch-and-pull and press) mixed within
one block, the target level’s heights in one trial to another had a
larger difference than BLOCK-2 and BLOCK-1 that only included 6
levels. This implied more travelling distance when switching be-
tween trials. Thus, the challenge to prepare the gesture was higher
in BLOCK-3, which might lead some participants to exit the area
earlier to prepare for the next trial.
6.6 Qualitative Results
6.6.1 Participants felt having more control when performing the
pinch-and-pull gestures. Surprisingly, although the performances of
pinch-and-pull and press were quite similar, half of the participants
(6/12) reported that they felt that they had a better sense of control
for pinch-and-pull. Only 2 participants felt that they could control
the press gestures more accurately. Some participants (4/12) ex-
plained that it was because they had more rooms to pull the airbag
upwards with, in contrast with pressing the airbag towards the
screen which at some point blocked their finger movement. Half of
the participants (6/12) also mentioned that, withpinch-and-pull, the
silicon’s elasticity provided additional sense of resistance onto their
AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy Zhang et al.
finger, and this resistance kept increasing as they pulled harder.
In contrast, when pressing harder, the silicon surface eventually
touched the rigid screen, so the perception became somewhat simi-
lar to just touching the screen. That said, most participants (8/12)
still reported that pressing the airbag increased the sense of control
compared to touching the rigid screen directly, because the soft
airbag deformed under pressure, consequently providing additional
sensory cues and enabling more freedom of finger movement.
6.6.2 Participants appreciated the coupling between visual display
and touch I/O interactions. All 12 participants appreciated the sen-
sation of touching theIn-Flat’s overlay. They perceived the silicon’s
texture as "comfortable" (8/12) and the "bouncy feeling" of the airbag
was "interactive" and "fun" (5/12). Most participants (10/12) thought
the transparent silicon layer allowed them to see the visual display
with no issues. More than half of participants (7/12) highly appre-
ciated the visual effect of dynamic movement of the airbag in the
animated breathing lung demo, and found that it "follows well the
movement of the GIF " (6/12) and "[looks] vivid and natural " (3/12).
Thanks to the combination of two modalities (visual+touch), they
"can feel what [they] see " (P2) and it was " dynamic and playful "
(P5) and " makes the phone alive " (P1,P10). The participants also
appreciated the possibility of using different shapes of silicon layer
including grids, buttons, and console controllers. They expressed
willingness to use In-Flat in their daily life and proposed different
ways of using it, for example as landmarks on the screen and help
guiding the movement of the finger (P4) and providing full tactile
experience when watching a movie (P7).
7 DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS, FUTURE
WORK
Improving pressure control on smartphones. Thanks to the
high stretchability of the In-Flat’s silicon layer, users can perform
not only press but also pinch-and-pull input gestures. To the best of
our knowledge, previously proposed touch devices did not specifi-
cally discuss nor compare user performance of pinch-and-pull and
press gestures. Our evaluation with In-Flat indicated that the partic-
ipants were able to performpinch-and-pull gestures as accurately as
press gestures, despite the fact that they mentioned of never using
pinch-and-pull gestures to interact with digital devices in their daily
lives. This shows a promising opportunity to leverage inflatable
silicon layers for rich pressure-based input capabilities.
Reflecting on the results of our evaluation, we see different ways
to improve pressure-based controls on inflatable silicons. We only
tested six levels of pinch-and-pull and six levels of press. The par-
ticipants could perform both gestures with high success rate and
high accuracy. Fruchard et al. [10] suggested that pressure-based
input like press on a soft surface was underestimated. Similarly, the
performance of the pinch-and-pull gestures with In-Flat might also
be underestimated. A future study on pinch-and-pull is needed to
better determine its full potentials, i.e., how many levels of pinch-
and-pull gestures can the users control reliably.
Although statistically not different, some participants in our
evaluation study mentioned that performing the pinch-and-pull
gestures required more physical demands than press gestures be-
cause the silicon’s surface was too smooth to pinch. To make the
surface easier to pinch, we can consider using different materials
that can induce larger frictions or fabricate the silicone to include a
small handle that is easier to pull. However, this might compromise
the transparency that is needed to enable clear visual display when
put on top of the screen.
Improving the technical implementation. The current pro-
totype, which was conceived as a probe to experiment on the press
and pinch-and-pull gestures and to explore applications and use
cases, still has some limitations. First, due to the electrical insulation
property of the silicon we used, the current In-Flat prototype does
not support touchscreen interactions when the overlay is placed
on top of the screen. However, researchers in material science pro-
posed new materials that are not only stretchable and transparent,
but also conductive [ 44, 44]. Combining In-Flat with these new
materials would thus solve this limitation. Second, pneumatic tech-
nology limits the mobility because of the relatively important size
of the actuation device. This problem could be solved by adopting
a new, more compact, pneumatic technology such as FlowIO [28].
Moreover, because of its reduced size, this new technology may
allow using more cells than in the current prototype.
Exploring different inflation medium. Another interesting
research direction would be to use other media than air to inflate
the silicon bags. For example, we explored water-inflated silicon
bags in Section 4. The observed plano-convex lens effect then affects
the visual display on the screen, a feature that may be interesting
for certain tasks, such as showing details on the screen [ 34] or
performing fish-eye effects [23]. As participants mentioned, the
tactile feeling (e.g. complicity/stiffness, density, temperature) could
change with different medium, and fluids with different colors could
be used to make the airbags work as physical filters.
Beyond augmenting smartphones. The current design of In-
Flat focused on smartphone interactions, but it can potentially be
adapted to larger devices, by increasing the number of airbags. As
some participants mentioned in the evaluation, In-Flat’s overlay
can be designed to be detach-and-play on any device such as a
smartwatch or a tabletop. One factor to be considered is the trade-
off between size and mobility: the bigger the overlay is, the more
complex pneumatic control it needs, hence, limiting its mobility.
This may not be an issue for fixed devices like tabletops, but future
work should address this issue for bigger mobile devices like tablets.
8 CONCLUSION
This paper aims to augment smartphones with touch I/O capabili-
ties. With our fabrication approach, we produce pressure-sensitive
silicon layers with high transparency level, enabling users to 1)
see the visual display; 2) perceive tangible affordances when In-
Flat’s overlay is inflated; and 3) perform continuous pressure input
gestures. As such, we enable in-place coupling between visual ob-
jects displayed on the smartphone and touch I/O interactions. The
participants in our evaluation study were able to perform both
pinch-and-pull and press gestures on In-Flat with similar perfor-
mance. They also appreciated the fact that they could still see the
visual display, and at the same time, perceive the dynamic tangi-
ble affordance that enriched their visual perceptions. Our work
demonstrates the potentials of supporting rich tangible interac-
tions on smartphones, in particular the potential of adding in-place
pressure-based I/O capabilities on touchscreens.
Pulling, Pressing, and Sensing with In-Flat AVI 2022, June 6–10, 2022, Frascati, Rome, Italy
REFERENCES
[1] Jessalyn Alvina, Chengcheng Qu, Joanna McGrenere, and Wendy E. Mackay.
2019. MojiBoard: Generating Parametric Emojis with Gesture Keyboards. In
Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312771
[2] Jessalyn Alvina, Shengdong Zhao, Simon T. Perrault, Maryam Azh, Thijs Roumen,
and Morten Fjeld. 2015. OmniVib: Towards Cross-Body Spatiotemporal Vibrotac-
tile Notifications for Mobile Phones. In Proc. of the 33rd CHI (Seoul, Korea) (CHI
’15). ACM, New York, USA, 2487–2496. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702341
[3] Apple. 2018. UITouch - Apple Developper Documentation. https://developer.
apple.com/documentation/uikit/uitouch. Accessed: 2022-01-10.
[4] David Beattie, William Frier, Orestis Georgiou, Benjamin Long, and Damien
Ablart. 2020. Incorporating the Perception of Visual Roughness into the Design
of Mid-Air Haptic Textures. In ACM SAP ’20 (Virtual Event, USA). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 4, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385955.3407927
[5] Wouter M. Bergmann Tiest. 2010. Tactual perception of material properties.Vision
Research 50, 24 (2010), 2775–2782. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2010.10.005
Perception and Action: Part I.
[6] Stephen A. Brewster and Michael Hughes. 2009. Pressure-Based Text Entry for
Mobile Devices. In Proc. of 11th MobileHCI (Bonn, Germany). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, Article 9, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1613858.1613870
[7] Jared Cechanowicz, Pourang Irani, and Sriram Subramanian. 2007. Augmenting
the mouse with pressure sensitive input. In Proc. of the SIGCHI . 1385–1394.
[8] Christian Corsten, Simon Voelker, Andreas Link, and Jan Borchers. 2018. Use
the Force Picker, Luke: Space-Efficient Value Input on Force-Sensitive Mobile
Touchscreens. In Proc. of the 2018 CHI (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174235
[9] Yuan-Ling Feng, Roshan Lalintha Peiris, Charith Lasantha Fernando, and Kouta
Minamizawa. 2018. 3D printed haptics: creating pneumatic haptic display based
on 3D printed airbags. In International Conference on Human Haptic Sensing and
Touch Enabled Computer Applications. Springer, 180–192.
[10] Bruno Fruchard, Paul Strohmeier, Roland Bennewitz, and Jurgen Steimle. 2021.
Squish This: Force Input on Soft Surfaces for Visual Targeting Tasks (CHI ’21).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445623
[11] Kristian Gohlke, Eva Hornecker, and Wolfgang Sattler. 2016. Pneumatibles:
Exploring Soft Robotic Actuators for the Design of User Interfaces with Pneumo-
tactile Feedback. In Proc. of the TEI ’16 (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (TEI ’16). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 308–315. https://doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2839489
[12] Jaehyun Han, Jiseong Gu, and Geehyuk Lee. 2014. Trampoline: A double-sided
elastic touch device for creating reliefs. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology . 383–388.
[13] Chris Harrison and Scott E. Hudson. 2009. Providing Dynamically Changeable
Physical Buttons on a Visual Display. In Proc. of the SIGCHI (Boston, MA, USA)
(CHI ’09). ACM, USA, 299–308. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518749
[14] Seongkook Heo and Geehyuk Lee. 2011. Force gestures: augmented touch screen
gestures using normal and tangential force. In CHI’11 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1909–1914.
[15] Sungjune Jang, Lawrence H. Kim, Kesler Tanner, Hiroshi Ishii, and Sean Follmer.
2016. Haptic Edge Display for Mobile Tactile Interaction. In Proc. of the 2016
CHI (San Jose, California, USA) (CHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3706–3716.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858264
[16] JMP Statistical Discovery LLC. 2021. JMP-Statistical Software. https://www.jmp.
com/en_gb/home.html [Accessed 17-August-2021].
[17] Robert H. LaMotte. 2000. Softness Discrimination With a Tool. Journal of
Neurophysiology 83, 4 (2000), 1777–1786. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2000.83.4.1777
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2000.83.4.1777 PMID: 10758090.
[18] Lijuan Liu, Cheng Yao, Yizhou Liu, Pinhao Wang, Yang Chen, and Fangtian Ying.
2020. FlowGlove: A Liquid-Based Wearable Device for Haptic Interaction in
Virtual Reality. In International Conference on HCI . Springer, 316–331.
[19] Jens Maiero, David Eibich, Ernst Kruijff, André Hinkenjann, Wolfgang Stuer-
zlinger, Hrvoje Benko, and Gheorghita Ghinea. 2019. Back-of-Device Force
Feedback Improves Touchscreen Interaction for Mobile Devices. EEE Trans.
Haptics 12, 4 (Oct. 2019), 483–496. https://doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2019.2911519
[20] Viktor Miruchna, Robert Walter, David Lindlbauer, Maren Lehmann, Regine von
Klitzing, and Jörg Müller. 2015. GelTouch: Localized Tactile Feedback Through
Thin, Programmable Gel. In Proc. of the 28th UIST (Charlotte, NC, USA) (UIST
’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807487
[21] Sachi Mizobuchi, Shinya Terasaki, Turo Keski-Jaskari, Jari Nousiainen, Matti
Ryynanen, and Miika Silfverberg. 2005. Making an impression: force-controlled
pen input for handheld devices. In CHI’05 extended abstracts. 1661–1664.
[22] Young-Woo Park, Kyoung-Min Baek, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2013. The Roles of Touch
during Phone Conversations: Long-Distance Couples’ Use of POKE in Their
Homes. In Proc. of the SIGCHI CHI (Paris, France) (CHI ’13). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 1679–1688. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466222
[23] Cyprien Pindat, Emmanuel Pietriga, Olivier Chapuis, and Claude Puech. 2012.
JellyLens: Content-Aware Adaptive Lenses. In Proc. of the 25th Annual ACM
Symposium on UIST (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) (UIST ’12). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 261–270. https://doi.org/10.1145/2380116.2380150
[24] Ivan Poupyrev, Shigeaki Maruyama, and Jun Rekimoto. 2002. Ambient Touch:
Designing Tactile Interfaces for Handheld Devices. In Proc. of the 15th Annual
ACM Symposium on UIST (Paris, France) (UIST ’02). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
51–60. https://doi.org/10.1145/571985.571993
[25] J. Rantala, R. Raisamo, J. Lylykangas, V. Surakka, J. Raisamo, K. Salminen, T.
Pakkanen, and A. Hippula. 2009. Methods for Presenting Braille Characters on a
Mobile Device with a Touchscreen and Tactile Feedback. IEEE Transactions on
Haptics 2, 1 (2009), 28–39. https://doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2009.3
[26] Alex Russomanno, Zhentao Xu, Sile O’Modhrain, and Brent Gillespie. 2017. A
pneu shape display: Physical buttons with programmable touch response. In2017
IEEE WHC. 641–646. https://doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2017.7989976
[27] Deepak Ranjan Sahoo, Kasper Hornbæk, and Sriram Subramanian. 2016. Table-
Hop: An Actuated Fabric Display Using Transparent Electrodes . ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 3767–3780. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858544
[28] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021.FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi”
for Soft Robotics. ACM, New York, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[29] Smooth-on. 2018. Ecoflex Series. https://www.smooth-on.com/tb/files/SORTA_
CLEAR_SERIES_TB.pdf. Accessed: 2021-10-03.
[30] Smooth-on. 2018. SORTA-Clear Series. https://www.smooth-on.com/tb/files/
ECOFLEX_SERIES_TB.pdf. Accessed: 2021-10-03.
[31] Yuta Sugiura, Masahiko Inami, and Takeo Igarashi. 2012. A thin stretchable
interface for tangential force measurement. In Proceedings of the 25th annual
ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . 529–536.
[32] Shan-Yuan Teng, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, Chi Wang, Chi-huan Chiang, Da-Yuan Huang,
Liwei Chan, and Bing-Yu Chen. 2018. PuPoP: Pop-up Prop on Palm for Virtual
Reality. In Proc. of the 31st UIST (Berlin, Germany) (UIST ’18). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 5–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242628
[33] Marc Teyssier, Gilles Bailly, Catherine Pelachaud, Eric Lecolinet, Andrew Conn,
and Anne Roudaut. 2019. Skin-On Interfaces: A Bio-Driven Approach for Artifi-
cial Skin Design to Cover Interactive Devices. In Proc. of the 32nd Annual ACM
Symposium on UIST (New Orleans, LA, USA) (UIST ’19). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 307–322. https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347943
[34] Soichiro Toyohara, Toshiki Sato, and Hideki Koike. 2018. Balloonygen: Extended
Tabletop Display Embedded with Balloon-like Deformable Spherical Screen. In
Proc. of the 24th ACM VRST (Tokyo, Japan) (VRST ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 7, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3281505.3281532
[35] Ryusei Uramune, Hiroki Ishizuka, Takefumi Hiraki, Yoshihiro Kawahara, Sei
Ikeda, and Osamu Oshiro. 2020. HaPouch: Soft and Wearable Haptic Display
Devices Using Liquid-to-Gas Phase Change Actuator. In Adjunct Publication of
the 33rd UIST (Virtual Event, USA) (UIST ’20 Adjunct). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
53–55. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379350.3416183
[36] Wikipedia contributors. 2021. Flappy Bird — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
dia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flappy_Bird&oldid=1037577492
[Online; accessed 16-August-2021].
[37] Graham Wilson and Stephen A Brewster. 2017. Multi-moji: Combining thermal,
vibrotactile & visual stimuli to expand the affective range of feedback. In Proc. of
the 2017 CHI. 1743–1755.
[38] Graham Wilson, Craig Stewart, and Stephen A. Brewster. 2010. Pressure-Based
Menu Selection for Mobile Devices. In Proc. of the 12th International Conference
on Mobile HCI (Lisbon, Portugal) (MobileHCI ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
181–190. https://doi.org/10.1145/1851600.1851631
[39] Katrin Wolf and Timm Bäder. 2015. Illusion of Surface Changes Induced by
Tactile and Visual Touch Feedback. In Proc. of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
Extended Abstracts (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (CHI EA ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 1355–1360. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732703
[40] Koji Yatani and Khai Nhut Truong. 2009. SemFeel: A User Interface with Semantic
Tactile Feedback for Mobile Touch-Screen Devices. In Proc. of the 22nd Annual
ACM Symposium on UIST (Victoria, BC, Canada) (UIST ’09). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 111–120. https://doi.org/10.1145/1622176.1622198
[41] Yongjae Yoo, Taekbeom Yoo, Jihyun Kong, and Seungmoon Choi. 2015. Emotional
responses of tactile icons: Effects of amplitude, frequency, duration, and envelope.
In 2015 IEEE WHC. IEEE, 235–240.
[42] Zhuoming Zhang, Jessalyn Alvina, Robin Héron, Stéphane Safin, Françoise Dé-
tienne, and Eric Lecolinet. 2021. Touch without Touching: Overcoming Social
Distancing in Semi-Intimate Relationships with SansTouch (CHI ’21). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445612
[43] Zhuoming Zhang, Robin Héron, Eric Lecolinet, Françoise Detienne, and Stéphane
Safin. 2019. VisualTouch: Enhancing Affective Touch Communication with Multi-
Modality Stimulation. In 2019 ICMI (Suzhou, China) (ICMI ’19). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 114–123. https://doi.org/10.1145/3340555.3353733
[44] Ying Zhou, Reiko Azumi, and Satoru Shimada. 2019. A highly durable, stretch-
able, transparent and conductive carbon nanotube–polymeric acid hybrid film.
Nanoscale 11, 9 (2019), 3804–3813.