VIREO: Web-based Graphical Authoring of Vibrotactile Feedback
for Interactions with Mobile and Wearable Devices
Mihail Terenti and Radu-Daniel Vatavu
MintViz Lab, MANSiD Research Center, S ¸tefan cel Mare University of Suceava
13 Universitatii, 720229 Suceava, Romania
AR TICLE HISTOR Y
Compiled September 17, 2022
ABSTRACT
We introduce VIREO, a web-based software tool for graphical authoring of vibro-
tactile feedback for mobile and wearable applications. VIREO enables ﬂexible spec-
iﬁcation of vibrotactile patterns with model-based and free-draw sketch input, and
is compatible with mobile and wearable devices that support JavaScript, either
natively at the platform level or in a web browser. We demonstrate the practical
utility of VIREO by presenting several applications implemented for a smartphone,
smartwatch, smart armband, and a pair of smartglasses that integrate vibrotactile
feedback patterns authored with VIREO. Also, we present the results of an usability
evaluation study involving sixteen participants represented by coders with various
programming experience and levels of programming language proﬁciency, including
JavaScript. We discuss our contribution in the context of the results of a Systematic
Literature Review that we conducted on the topic of software tools, editors, and
platforms developed in the scientiﬁc community for authoring vibrotactile feedback.
Since one major ﬁnding of our review is the little availability of such contributions,
we release VIREO as a free web resource for researchers and practitioners that wish
to author and integrate vibrotactile feedback in mobile and wearable applications.
KEYWORDS
Vibrotactile feedback; mobile devices; wearable devices; web tool; JavaScript
1. Introduction
Smart mobile devices, such as smartphones, tablets, and phablets, have become domi-
nant in the landscape of personal computing devices, enabling interaction on the go and
rich possibilities for communication, access to information, and interactions in mixed
reality environments. Also in this landscape, smart wearables, such as smartwatches,
smartglasses, and digital jewellery, represent the fastest-growing technological innova-
tion for mobile users (Menear, 2020), providing new functionality and services com-
plementary to the prevalent smartphone (Chen, Chen, Liu, Chen, and Li, 2021; Sani,
Boos, Yun, and Zhong, 2015), but also likely to replace smartphones in the foreseeable
future. Mobile and wearable devices enable a diversity of output modalities for users,
from primarily visual feedback on smartphones and smartwatches (Matulic, Ganeshan,
Fujiwara, and Vogel, 2021; Wenig, Sch¨ oning, Olwal, Oben, and Malaka, 2017) to aural
feedback for devices worn on the head (Brezolin, Santos, de Lima, Zanella, Rieder,
CONTACT Radu-Daniel Vatavu. Email: radu.vatavu@usm.ro
and De Marchi, 2017; Casamassima, Ferrari, Milosevic, Rocchi, and Farella, 2013) to
haptic feedback for ﬁtness trackers and electronic rings (Han, Han, Annett, Ander-
son, Huang, and Yang, 2017; Turmo Vidal, Zhu, Waern, and M´ arquez Segura, 2021;
Vatavu, Mossel, and Sch¨ onauer, 2016). However, the choice of the output modality also
depends on the context in which such devices are used and worn. For instance, in some
contexts of use, interaction with mobile and wearable devices needs to be subtle (Pohl,
Muresan, and Hornbæk, 2019), non-disturbing to the user and the others (Anderson,
Grossman, Wigdor, and Fitzmaurice, 2015), while nevertheless retaining highly in-
formative and eﬀective qualities despite temporary situations and interaction-related
constraints determined by the context of use (Heller, Vanacken, Geurts, and Luyten,
2020; Wobbrock, 2019).
Among the possible feedback modalities available on mobile and wearable devices,
haptic feedback enables a wide range of possible implementations that target various
receptors on the human body—in the form of tactile, thermal, or force feedback (Bas-
dogan, Giraud, Levesque, and Choi, 2020; Jones, 2016; Kang and Lee, 2018; Song,
Lim, and Yun, 2016; Wang, Guo, Liu, Zhang, Xu, and Xiao, 2019; Youn, Lee, Kim,
Shim, Chan, and Lee, 2021)—and has been found eﬀective for contexts of use char-
acterized by constraints such as those enumerate above. Vibrotactile feedback, which
falls under the general category of haptics, is implemented via controlled vibrations
targeting speciﬁc cutaneous mechanoreceptors located in the human skin. Compared
to other haptic modalities, vibrotactile feedback is widely available on a diversity of
mobile and wearable devices that integrate vibration motors, e.g., from the buzz of
an incoming call on a smartphone or smartwatch (Hong, Lee, and Choi, 2013; Israr,
Zhao, and Schneider, 2015; Park and Choi, 2017; Sch¨ onauer, Mossel, Zaiti, and Vatavu,
2015) to the rumble of a game controller (Swindells, Pietarinen, and Viitanen, 2014)
to a hobbyist’s custom-made wearable prototypes (Terenti and Vatavu, 2022), which
makes it an accessible modality for practitioners to use in their applications.
Several options are available to design, implement, and integrate vibrotactile feed-
back into applications, among which two main trends can be identiﬁed: (i) specifying
vibrotactile feedback programmatically at code level and (ii) using authoring tools and
editors to design vibration patterns, which are exported to applications. For instance,
Apple’s Core Haptics1 enables implementation of haptic patterns that are highly cus-
tomizable, but need to be speciﬁed in code via API calls, and Haptrix 2 is an example
of a graphical editor that leverages Core Haptics to make the developers’ task eas-
ier in that regard. Unfortunately, some of these solutions target speciﬁc platforms
and/or operating systems, as these two examples show, which limits the range of sup-
ported devices. Other tools address a wider range of platforms, operating systems,
and programming languages, but specialize on particular haptic synthesis or render-
ing technology. For instance, Lofelt Studio 3 enables iOS and Android developers to
design, test, and integrate tactile eﬀects for mobile devices by deriving haptic clips
from audio ﬁles. However, the audio ﬁle must be available to start oﬀ haptics design.
Unlike Lofelt, Syntacts4 enable design of rich vibrotactile patterns from scratch with a
powerful editor and APIs for C++, C#, Python, and Unity developers, but the results
are rendered via audio interfaces, which limits the range of addressable target devices
1Core Haptics — Apple Developer Documentation, https://developer.apple.com/documentation/
corehaptics.
2Haptrix - Create & Share Haptic Experiences, https://www.haptrix.com.
3Lofelt - Unlock the power of haptics in mobile devices, https://lofelt.com.
4Syntacts — The Tactor Synthesizer, https://www.syntacts.org.
2
to desktop platforms. 5 More ﬂexible tools that enable authoring of vibrotactile pat-
terns in a way that is not platform-, synthesis-, and rendering technology-dependent
have been demonstrated in the scientiﬁc literature (Hong et al., 2013; Lee and Choi,
2012; Lee, Ryu, and Choi, 2009a; Pan¨ eels, Anastassova, and Brunet, 2013; Ryu and
Choi, 2008) but, unfortunately, they are not publicly available.
In this context, new initiatives and corresponding tools are needed in the community
to democratize design of rich and expressive vibrotactile feedback patterns and their
integration in applications addressing a wide range of mobile and wearable devices,
including new devices with diverse characteristics, development platforms, and operat-
ing systems to be released in the foreseeable future. Since such devices are expected to
feature web connectivity in order to access cloud services (Chen, Ma, Li, Wu, Zhang,
and Youn, 2017), integrate with IoT (Furini, Mirri, Montangero, and Prandi, 2020),
or simply to retrieve and share data (Schneegass, Poguntke, and Machulla, 2019), we
argue that web technology in the form of programming languages, communication pro-
tocols, and data formats designed for the web 6,7 can be leveraged as an all-inclusive
medium for both vibrotactile feedback design on the web and rendering of vibrations
on a target device. Such an approach will democratize both the process of designing
vibrotactile feedback patterns, including their management and sharing as readily ac-
cessible online collections, but also implementation on a wide range of mobile and
wearable devices that support web applications natively or in a web browser. In this
context, we make the following practical contributions in this paper:
(1) We conduct a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) on the topic of software au-
thoring tools, editors, and platforms developed in the scientiﬁc community for
vibrotactile feedback design in order to understand the extent of these contribu-
tions, their authoring techniques, target platforms, and addressed devices. Our
ﬁndings, based on the analysis of twenty-ﬁve software tools and corresponding
scientiﬁc papers published at peer-reviewed academic venues, show that most
of the tools have targeted desktop environments and, arguably because of that,
very few are still publicly available.
(2) We introduce VIREO (VIbrotactile Online EditoR, see Figure 1 for a screen-
shot), our software tool for authoring vibrotactile feedback patterns on the web
with several convenient features for practitioners: model-based authoring of vi-
brotactile patterns, pattern composition via direction manipulation, pattern au-
thoring via free-draw sketching and user demonstration, management of pattern
libraries on the web, and easy integration with mobile and wearable devices
that are connected to the web. We discuss technical implementation details of
VIREO, present user workﬂows, and describe the techniques available in VIREO
for authoring vibrotactile patterns.
(3) We demonstrate the practical utility of VIREO by presenting applications de-
5Although adaptation to mobile platforms might be possible; see FAQ, Can Syntacts be used for mobile
haptic applications?, https://www.syntacts.org/faq. However, Syntacts was primarily intended for desktop-
based research and applications (see link above).
6For example, wearables running Tizen can be programmed with just HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Tizen
Studio enables development of web applications for mobile, wearable, and TV devices, which consist of HTML,
JavaScript, and CSS combined in a package deployed to a Tizen device, such as Samsung Galaxy smartwatches;
see https://docs.tizen.org/application/web/index.
7Vibration API ( https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Vibration API) enables web appli-
cations to access the vibration hardware from mobile and wearable devices as long as the patterns can be
described as series of on and oﬀ pulses. This functionality is limited, but via pulse-width modulation (PWM),
it enables many haptic eﬀects for web applications running JavaScript, e.g., see http://www.hapticsjs.org or
https://npm.io/package/vtp.js.
3
Figure 1. Our tool, VIREO, freely available at https://vireoapp.com enables graphical authoring of vibro-
tactile feedback patterns for augmenting interactions on mobile and wearable devices that run JavaScript,
either as standalone applications or in a web browser. VIREO allows researchers and practitioners to specify
model-based vibrotactile patterns, e.g., exponential or harmonic waves, or simply to sketch a graphical pattern
to start oﬀ their designs, and then to deploy those designs to a target device. Note: we illustrate in this picture
a vibration pattern with comfortable, smooth, and soft emotional connotations (Seiﬁ et al., 2015).
veloped for smartphone, smartwatch, smart armband, and smartglasses devices
integrating vibrotactile feedback patterns authored with VIREO.
(4) We conduct an usability evaluation study with VIREO and sixteen participants
representing coders with various levels of programming experience in various
programming languages and platforms. Our ﬁndings show a good overall usabil-
ity for authoring vibrotactile feedback patterns with VIREO, conﬁrmed by the
SUS (70.47) and CSUQ (2.68) usability tests, respectively.
2. Related W ork
We relate to prior work describing applications, tools, and graphical editors designed
to assist researchers and practitioners in authoring and implementing vibrotactile feed-
back. To this end, we conduct a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) study to identify
such prior work and to perform an overview of the software tools that have been devel-
oped in the scientiﬁc community, and in particular tools that are publicly available. For
the design of our SLR, we followed Siddaway, Wood, and Hedges (2019) for best prac-
tice recommendations and adopted the PRISMA method (Liberati, Altman, Tetzlaﬀ,
Mulrow, Gøtzsche, Ioannidis, Clarke, Devereaux, Kleijnen, and Moher, 2009) for the
identiﬁcation, screening, eligibility, inclusion, and snowballing steps. In the following,
we describe these steps in detail.
4
2.1. Study Design and Implementation
2.1.1. Identiﬁcation
This step consists in identifying work relevant to our topic of interest by specifying
keywords, search operators, and electronic databases where to search for those key-
words (Siddaway et al., 2019). Our focus is on software tools that enable authoring
vibrotactile feedback patterns for mobile and wearable interactions. However, even
though we are interested in mobile and wearable devices only, we considered the scope
of our SLR to be much broader, as we ﬁgured that mobile and especially wearable
devices have been little addressed by such tools. Regarding the relevant venues where
such research has been traditionally disseminated, we considered SIGCHI conferences,
available through the ACM Digital Library, and IEEE specialized venues, such as the
Haptics Symposium, World Haptics, and Transactions on Haptics, available from the
IEEE Xplore scientiﬁc database. We searched keywords in the abstracts of the papers
available from these two databases since searching through the entire text resulted in
many nonrelevant records, while searching just in the paper titles resulted in missing
relevant work. Based on these considerations, we ran the following query:
Abstract: (vibrotactile AND (feedback OR pattern*) AND (tool* OR
platform* OR author*)))
that returned 18 results from ACM DL and 52 results from IEEE Explore. 8
2.1.2. Screening
We screened the abstracts of these papers to evaluate their relevancy for our topic
of interest regarding software tools for vibrotactile feedback. We removed 43 papers,
most of which described applications that employed vibrotactile feedback, for which
the keywords from our query were used in another context, e.g., “surgical tools” in the
visuohaptic bone saw simulator of Olsson, Nysj¨ o, Singh, Thor, and Carlbom (2015)
or “operating power tools” in the exploration of Yin, Otis, Fortin, and Cooperstock
(2019) of assembly tasks in VR with a simulated impact wrench. After the screening
step, we arrived at a number of 27 papers.
2.1.3. Eligibility and Inclusion
We scrutinized the remaining papers by reading the entire text in order to identify
tools, editors, platforms, or applications developed for authoring vibrotactile patterns.
To this end, we formulated the following eligibility criteria: (EC 1) the content of the
paper must be available, in English, and the content was peer-reviewed, (EC 2) the
paper is about vibrotactile feedback, and (EC3) the paper describes a tool, in any form,
that enables authoring of vibrotactile feedback patterns for integration in applications.
By applying these criteria, we removed 14 references, 9 leaving a subset of 13 papers
relevant to our topic of investigation.
8An adapted form of the query was used in IEEE Xplore due to the speciﬁcs of the IEEE Xplore search
engine, but with the same keywords and operators: ”Abstract”: vibrotactile AND (”Abstract”: feedback OR
”Abstract”: pattern*) AND (”Abstract”: tool* OR ”Abstract”: platform* OR ”Abstract”: author*).
9We also removed (Lee and Choi, 2012) that described VibScoreEditor, a tool relevant to our scope, but
already presented in a previous paper (Lee et al., 2009a) by the same authors.
5
Table 1.: Authoring tools for vibrotactile feedback identiﬁed in our Systematic Literature Review (SLR) study. Notes: diﬀerent
colors depict diﬀerent goals, target devices, and authoring techniques for these tools. The last row shows our tool, VIREO, with
distinct characteristics in this landscape.
Reference T ool name Objective of the
tool/research†
Authoring
platform‡ T arget device§ Authoring technique ¶ Avail-
able?
1 Enriquez and
MacLean (2003)
Hapticon
Editor T Haptic icon design G Desktop L Terrain display
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns Q User
demonstration
−
2
Swindells,
Maksakov,
MacLean, and
Chung (2006)
Haptic Icon
Prototyper T Haptic icon design G Desktop L Generic, not
speciﬁed
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns
Q Waveform editing
−
3
Eid, Andrews,
Alamri, and
El Saddik (2008)
HAMLAT
T Enhancing immersive
experiences (extension of a VR
graphics engine with haptics)
G Desktop L VR devices
Q Direct manipulation
(edit haptic
properties-stifness,
friction)
−
4
Ryu and Choi
(2008); Lee et al.
(2009a)
posVib
Editor
T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring G Desktop L Multi-actuator
devices
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns −
5 Park, Hwang, and
Hwang (2009)
Vibration
Composer
T Software tool
recommendations for designing
vibrotactile patterns
G Desktop L Handheld Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns −
6
Lee and Choi
(2012); Lee et al.
(2009a); Lee, Ryu,
and Choi (2009b)
VibScore
Editor
T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring G Desktop L Generic, not
speciﬁed
Q Concept of ”vibrotactile
score” Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns
−
7 Kim, Cha, Ryu,
and Oakley (2010) − T Enhancing immersive
experiences (tactile video) G Desktop L Custom glove
Q Direct manipulation
(map vibrations to video
with a software brush)
−
8
Park, Choi,
Hwang, Kim, Sa,
and Joung (2011)
− T Enabling virtual buttons for
mobile touchscreen devices G Mobile L Mobile devices Q Select from library (72
records) −
9 Hong et al. (2013)
New
Vibration
Editor
T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring G Mobile L Mobile devices
Q User demonstration
(pressure input on
touchscreen)
−
10
Pan¨ eels et al.
(2013) TactiPEd T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring G Desktop L Multi-actuator
devices Q Waveform editing −
11
Swindells et al.
(2014)
ViviTouch
Studio
T Prototyping mixed audio,
video, and vibrotactile
feedback
G Desktop L Game
controllers
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns −
12
Mart´ ınez, Garc´ ıa,
Oliver, Molina, and
Gonz´ alez (2014)
VITAKI T Enhancing immersive
experiences (VR) G Desktop L VR devices
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns
Q Waveform editing
−
13
Schneider and
MacLean (2014) mHIVE
T Collaborative manipulation
and exploration of haptic
sensations
G Mobile L Generic, not
speciﬁed
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns
Q Waveform editing
−
14
Dong, Gao,
Al Osman, and
El Saddik (2015)
Web
MPEGV
Haptic
Authoring
T Enhancing immersive
experiences (MPEG-V) G Web L VR devices
Q Direct manipulation
(edit haptic
properties-stifness,
friction)
−
15 Israr et al. (2015) Feel
Messenger
T Enhancing social and
interpersonal communication G Mobile L Mobile devices Q Select from library −
16 Seiﬁ et al. (2015) VibViz T Taxonomy and navigation for
vibrotactile library G Web L Generic,
wristband
Q Select from library (120
records)
Yes
[link]
17
Schneider, Israr,
and MacLean
(2015)
Mango
T Enabling professional
animators to design for
vibrotactile grids
G Desktop L Vibrotactile
arrays
Q Animation tools
(timeline, keyframes, object
paths)
−
18
Le, Zhu, Kosinski,
Fjeld, Azh, and
Zhao (2016)
Ubitile T Vibrotactile feedback for
interactive tabletops
G Ring &
tabletop
L Ring &
tabletop
Q User demonstration
(movements of the ﬁnger
wearing a ring)
−
19
Schneider and
MacLean (2016) Macaron T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring G Web L Generic, not
speciﬁed Q Waveform editing Yes
[link]
20
Huang, Chan, Jian,
Chang, Chen,
Yang, Hung, and
Chen (2016)
VibroPlay T Enhancing immersive
experiences (VR)
G VR
(HMD)
L Chair with
actuators
Q Direct manipulation
(switch virtual actuators
on/oﬀ in VR)
−
21
Boer, Vallg˚ arda,
and Cahill (2017)
Hedonic
Haptic
player
T Exploration of ”aesthetic
form-giving” in interaction
design
G Desktop L Custom
wearable
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns −
22
Park and Choi
(2017) PhysVib
T Enhancing immersive
experiences (extension of a
video game physics engine with
haptics)
G Mobile L Mobile devices
Q Automatic generation
(exponentially-decaying
sinusoidal model)
Yes
[link]
23
Clark, Schneider,
MacLean, and Tan
(2017)
MacaronMix T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring G Web L Generic, not
speciﬁed
Q Automatic generation
(vibrotactile morphing with
DTW)
Yes
[link]
24
Danieau, Guillotel,
Dumas, Lopez,
Leroy, and Mollet
(2018)
HFX Studio T Enhancing immersive
experiences (VR) G Desktop L Generic, not
speciﬁed
Q Haptic perceptual
models −
25
Pezent, Cambio,
and O’Malley
(2021)
Syntacts
T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring
T Audio-controlled haptics
G Desktop L Vibrotactile
arrays
Q Composition of
predeﬁned patterns
Q Waveform editing
Q Numerical models
Yes
[link]
This paper VIREO
T Generic-purpose vibrotactile
pattern authoring for
T Speciﬁc applications in
mobile and wearable
computing
G Web
L Mobile and
wearable devices
supporting web
standards and
JavaScript
Q Pattern models Q
Waveform editing
Q Composition of patterns
Q Direct manipulation
(pattern composition)
Q User demonstration (free
draw input)
Yes
[link]
†Legend: T generic tools (7) T immersive environments/media (8) T speciﬁc applications, devices, or user groups (8) T research-
oriented explorations (3).
‡Legend: G web (4) G desktop (14) G mobile (5) G speciﬁc device (2).
§Legend: L mobile devices (5) L VR and game controllers (4), L custom device (9), L generic, not always speciﬁed (7).
¶Legend: Q composition of patterns (10) Q library-based (3) Q waveform editing (6) Q user demonstration (3) Q model-based (4) Q
speciﬁc techniques (5).
6
2.1.4. Snowballing
We browsed the list of references of the eligible papers and identiﬁed 8 new papers
relevant to our scope (abackward snowballing procedure) from a total of 591 references.
We also looked at the Google Scholar citations of the papers from our set and identiﬁed
4 more papers from a total of 676 citations (a forward snowballing procedure). Our
ﬁnal set is composed of 25 papers and corresponding tools for authoring vibrotactile
feedback; see Table 1 for an overview.
2.2. Results
The tools for authoring vibrotactile feedback identiﬁed in our SLR were introduced
for a diversity of reasons and a variety of objectives involving vibrotactile feedback as
well as for a variety of target platforms and devices. In our analysis, we grouped this
prior work according to several criteria; see the next subsections and the columns of
Table 1.
2.2.1. Objective of the tool
We identiﬁed four main reasons to introduce tools for authoring vibrotactile feedback
in the scientiﬁc community. In decreasing order, these are: (1) to support new user
experiences in immersive media and environments (30.8%) (Danieau et al., 2018; Dong
et al., 2015; Eid et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2016; Israr et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2010;
Mart´ ınez et al., 2014; Park and Choi, 2017), (2) to address speciﬁc devices or speciﬁc
professional user groups (30.8%) (Enriquez and MacLean, 2003; Le et al., 2016; Park
et al., 2011; Pezent et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2015; Schneider and MacLean, 2014;
Swindells et al., 2006, 2014), (3) generic tools to assist with authoring vibrotactile
feedback (26.9%) (Clark et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2013; Lee and Choi, 2012; Lee et al.,
2009a; Pan¨ eels et al., 2013; Pezent et al., 2021; Ryu and Choi, 2008; Schneider and
MacLean, 2016), and (4) research-oriented exploration of vibrotactile feedback that, as
part of the underlying scientiﬁc method, required new tools (11.5%) (Boer et al., 2017;
Park et al., 2009; Seiﬁ et al., 2015). For instance, Huang et al. (2016) introduced Vi-
broPlay, a tool for authoring 3D tactile eﬀects for immersive media experiences, that
implemented authoring via direct manipulation in VR: the haptic designer touches
virtual replicas of actual actuators, reproduced in the VR environment, by switching
them on and oﬀ to produce the desired eﬀect. Lee et al. (2009a) and Lee and Choi
(2012) introduced and evaluated the VibScore Editor, an application developed for
generic-purpose vibrotactile pattern authoring that employs the concept of a “vibro-
tactile score,” implemented with graphical symbols of musical notes. Le et al. (2016)
were interested in enhancing applications for interactive tabletops with vibrotactile
feedback on the user’s hand. To this end, they described an authoring technique based
on user demonstration: movements of the ﬁnger wearing a ring with built-in IMU sens-
ing were mapped to vibration duration and intensity, respectively. Boer et al. (2017)
is an example of a scientiﬁc examination where a new tool for vibrotactile feedback
was needed to enable “diﬀerent forms of pleasurable experiences targeting diﬀerent
moods and situations of the wearer” (p. 911). The authors explored and discussed
aspects of aesthetic form-giving in interaction design, which they evaluated with a
custom wearable device and application for creating vibrotactile feedback for that de-
vice. VibViz (Seiﬁ et al., 2015) was introduced as both a taxonomy and tool to assist
designers in the exploration of haptic collections with “easy and highly navigable ac-
7
cess to large, diverse sets of vibrotactile stimuli, on the premise that multiple access
pathways facilitate discovery and engagement” (p. 254).
2.2.2. Authoring platforms
We found that the majority of the tools introduced in the scientiﬁc community ad-
dressed desktop platforms (56.0%) followed by mobile (20.0%), web (16.0%) (Clark
et al., 2017; Dong et al., 2015; Schneider and MacLean, 2016; Seiﬁ et al., 2015), and
tools addressing speciﬁc devices (8.0%) (Huang et al., 2016; Le et al., 2016). Of these,
tools for the web are the easiest to access by practitioners from various platforms and
operating systems. For example, Schneider and MacLean (2016) introduced Macaron,
a vibrotactile eﬀect editor on the web implementing gallery examples, composability
of patterns via copy and paste, and visibility of the pattern parameters. Clark et al.
(2017) delivered an update, MacaronMix, featuring automatic generation of vibrotac-
tile eﬀects with Dynamic Time Warping as part of a morphing process where parent
signals are blended to create new patterns. Seiﬁ et al. (2015) presented VibViz, a web
application for navigating a library of 120 vibrotactile patterns with associated sen-
sory, emotional, and metaphorical connotations. Dong et al. (2015) developed the Web
MPEGV Haptic Authoring tool for multimedia applications to enable developers to
edit haptic properties for 3D objects on the web.
2.2.3. Target devices
The tools analyzed in our SLR were developed for vibrotactile feedback addressing
custom devices (36.0%) (Boer et al., 2017; Enriquez and MacLean, 2003; Huang et al.,
2016; Kim et al., 2010; Le et al., 2016; Pan¨ eels et al., 2013; Pezent et al., 2021; Ryu and
Choi, 2008; Schneider et al., 2015), mobile devices (20.0%), and VR and game con-
trollers (16.0%) (Dong et al., 2015; Eid et al., 2008; Mart´ ınez et al., 2014; Swindells
et al., 2014), while a percent of 28.0% of the papers did not specify the target de-
vice (Clark et al., 2017; Danieau et al., 2018; Lee and Choi, 2012; Lee et al., 2009a,b;
Schneider and MacLean, 2014, 2016; Seiﬁ et al., 2015). For example, Le et al. (2016)
were interested in vibrotactile feedback delivered on the user’s ﬁnger with a ring dur-
ing interactions with tabletops, Swindells et al. (2014) targeted game controllers, and
Eid et al. (2008), Mart´ ınez et al. (2014), and Dong et al. (2015) targeted VR devices.
A few tools (Hong et al., 2013; Israr et al., 2015; Park and Choi, 2017; Park et al.,
2011) explicitly addressed mobile devices, while wearables were targeted by three tools
identiﬁed by our SLR: VibViz with a wristband (Seiﬁ et al., 2015), tactile video with a
glove (Kim et al., 2010), and the Hedonic Haptic Player (Boer et al., 2017) delivering
vibrotactile feedback at various locations on the user’s body in the context of exploring
aesthetic interaction design.
2.2.4. Authoring techniques
We found several types of authoring techniques implemented by the tools that we ana-
lyzed, as follows: composition of patterns (32.3%), waveform editing (19.3%) (Mart´ ınez
et al., 2014; Pan¨ eels et al., 2013; Pezent et al., 2021; Schneider and MacLean, 2014,
2016; Swindells et al., 2006), use of numerical models to specify patterns (12.9%) (Clark
et al., 2017; Danieau et al., 2018; Park and Choi, 2017; Pezent et al., 2021), library
of patterns (9.7%) (Israr et al., 2015; Park et al., 2011; Seiﬁ et al., 2015), authoring
by means of user demonstration (9.7%) (Enriquez and MacLean, 2003; Hong et al.,
2013; Le et al., 2016), and techniques speciﬁc to various target devices and/or address-
8
ing professional user groups (16.1%) (Dong et al., 2015; Eid et al., 2008; Kim et al.,
2010; Lee and Choi, 2012; Lee et al., 2009a; Schneider et al., 2015). For example,
Hong et al. (2013) implemented user demonstration of vibrotactile pattern authoring
via pressure input on touchscreens. Park and Choi (2017) presented a technique for
the automatic generation of vibrotactile eﬀects for a video game physics engine based
on an exponentially-decaying sinusoidal model. Mart´ ınez et al. (2014) and Pezent
et al. (2021) presented tools featuring waveform editing and composition of predeﬁned
patterns. Schneider et al. (2015) introduced a new authoring technique, speciﬁcally
addressing professional animators, which employed animation tools, such as the time-
line, key frames, and object paths, to specify vibration patterns for vibrotactile arrays.
Other tools, such as posVibEditor (Ryu and Choi, 2008), were speciﬁcally designed
for a wide range of practitioners with a diversity of skills and experience with hap-
tics, i.e., “posVibEditor [is a tool] for quick and easy design of vibrotactile patterns
for vibration motors. The tool supports the drag-and-drop design paradigm so that
novice users can easily learn and interact with the tool” (p. 120), while ViviTouch
Studio (Swindells et al., 2014) was speciﬁcally developed for rapid prototyping. Some
papers also included comparative evaluations of several authoring techniques. For in-
stance, Huang et al. (2016) argued that haptic design based on sound waves did not
transfer well into tactile sensations for practitioners without suﬃcient expertise, and
proposed an authoring technique based on direct manipulation of virtual actuators in
VR for a physical chair with actuators. Hong et al. (2013) compared user demonstra-
tion with conventional waveform-based authoring and reported comparable or superior
performance of the former technique.
2.2.5. Availability of tools
Of all the twenty-ﬁve tools included in our analysis, only ﬁve are publicly avail-
able (Clark et al., 2017; Park and Choi, 2017; Pezent et al., 2021; Schneider and
MacLean, 2016; Seiﬁ et al., 2015), of which two, Macaron (Schneider and MacLean,
2016) and MacaronMix (Clark et al., 2017), share the same web application; see Ta-
ble 1 for the web links. PhysVib (Park and Choi, 2017) is an extension for a video
game physics engine that enables integration of immersive experiences in mobile video
games via automatic generation of haptic eﬀects, available on github. Macaron and
MacaronMix (Clark et al., 2017; Schneider and MacLean, 2016) implement waveform
editing and automatic generation of vibrotactile eﬀects by blending existing patterns.
VibViz (Seiﬁ et al., 2015) enables access to a library of 120 vibrotactile patterns with
corresponding sensory, emotional, and metaphorical mappings. And Syntacts (Pezent
et al., 2021) is a haptic rendering framework for desktop platforms with audio inter-
faces.
2.2.6. Summary
The results of our SLR revealed a variety of useful and creative techniques for au-
thoring vibrotactile feedback on a variety of platforms and for a diversity of target
devices, including mobile and wearable devices according to our scope. Unfortunately,
the tools featuring those techniques are not publicly available or, when they are, are
highly specialized, such as the audio haptics from by Syntacts (Pezent et al., 2021)
that are available for desktop platforms only. These ﬁndings suggest that further ef-
forts are needed in the scientiﬁc community to make software tools readily available
to researchers and practitioners in order to foster new scientiﬁc discoveries and practi-
9
cal developments involving vibrotactile feedback for mobile and wearable interactions.
Regarding the latter, our SLR revealed a few tools targeting mobile platforms (Hong
et al., 2013; Israr et al., 2015; Park and Choi, 2017; Park et al., 2011; Schneider and
MacLean, 2014), but limited work for wearable platforms, for which only speciﬁc de-
vices were targeted, such as a custom pair of gloves (Kim et al., 2010), electronic
ring (Le et al., 2016), wristband (Seiﬁ et al., 2015), and the Hedonic Haptic player de-
vice (Boer et al., 2017), respectively. However, oﬀ-the-shelf wearable devices integrate
vibration motors and readily support web standards, protocols, and data formats just
like the more complex mobile platforms. Therefore, we introduce VIREO, our tool
that is freely available on the web, which capitalizes on the results of our SLR and
features many of the useful authoring techniques that we identiﬁed in the scientiﬁc
literature; see the last row of Table 1. Speciﬁcally, VIREO implements waveform edit-
ing (Mart´ ınez et al., 2014; Pan¨ eels et al., 2013; Pezent et al., 2021; Schneider and
MacLean, 2014, 2016; Swindells et al., 2006), composition of patterns (Boer et al.,
2017; Enriquez and MacLean, 2003; Lee et al., 2009a; Mart´ ınez et al., 2014; Park
et al., 2009; Pezent et al., 2021; Ryu and Choi, 2008; Schneider and MacLean, 2014;
Swindells et al., 2006, 2014), direct manipulation (Dong et al., 2015; Eid et al., 2008;
Huang et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2010), and vibrotactile feedback authoring via user
demonstration (Hong et al., 2013; Le et al., 2016). Just like posVibEditor (Lee et al.,
2009a; Ryu and Choi, 2008), VibScoreEditor (Lee and Choi, 2012), New Vibration
Editor (Hong et al., 2013), TactiPEd (Pan¨ eels et al., 2013), Macaron and Macaron-
Mix (Clark et al., 2017; Schneider and MacLean, 2016), and Syntacts (Pezent et al.,
2021), VIREO implements generic-purpose vibrotactile pattern authoring, but ad-
dresses mobile and wearable devices speciﬁcally. Also, just like VibViz (Seiﬁ et al.,
2015), Macaron and MacaronMix (Clark et al., 2017; Schneider and MacLean, 2016),
and Web MPEGV (Dong et al., 2015), VIREO runs on the web. In the next section,
we present VIREO in detail.
3. VIREO
We introduce VIREO, our software tool for authoring vibrotactile feedback patterns
on the web and integration in mobile and wearable applications. We start with the
design requirements for VIREO, informed by the results of our SLR study and a
brainstorming session about requirements for authoring tools on the web, and continue
with technical implementation details and a description of the main features.
3.1. Design Requirements for VIREO
Based on our analysis of the scientiﬁc literature and our goals and scope regarding
vibrotactile feedback for mobile and wearable interactions, we identify the following
design requirements (DRs) for VIREO:
DR1: Web-based availability. VIREO must be easily accessible to researchers and prac-
titioners from various platforms and operating systems, for which a web-based
software design solution is the most straightforward approach to implementing
such a desideratum. The results from our SLR showed that the majority of the
software tools proposed in the scientiﬁc literature were delivered for speciﬁc oper-
ating systems, platforms, or devices (see Table 1), which constitutes a limitation
in terms of their large-scale accessibility.
10
DR2: Model-based design for accurate numerical modeling of vibrotactile feedback pat-
terns. VIREO must provide access to a library of mathematical models in order
to specify vibrotactile patterns with numerical precision, including models com-
monly used for implementing vibrotactile feedback in the scientiﬁc literature,
e.g., linear or exponential variation of vibration intensity over time (Park and
Choi, 2017; Pezent et al., 2021). Expert practitioners can easily identify these
models and readily employ them to specify custom vibrotactile feedback pat-
terns with mathematical precision. Also, patterns obtained with various models
can be combined by means of pattern composition techniques (Boer et al., 2017;
Enriquez and MacLean, 2003; Ryu and Choi, 2008; Swindells et al., 2006, 2014)
to author increasingly complex designs of vibrotactile feedback. For example, by
specifying a sequence of a linearly increasing intensity of vibration followed by
a linearly decreasing one, a “triangle” pattern is obtained.
DR3: Speciﬁcation of vibrotactile patterns via user demonstration to foster rapid pro-
totyping. VIREO must provide simple mechanisms that enable practitioners to
quickly generate vibrotactile feedback patterns based on ﬁrst-order approxima-
tions provided by means of demonstrations, e.g., sketches and free drawing for a
graphical authoring software tool. This design requirement enables novice users
to readily employ VIREO before becoming familiarized with numerical models
(DR2), but also expert users that wish to quickly evaluate preliminary ideas for
vibrotactile feedback patterns.
DR4: Easy integration with mobile and wearable devices. Authoring work usually takes
place on desktop PCs with large displays and computing resources, from which
the results are deployed to the target devices, which in our case are represented
by mobile and wearable devices supporting vibrotactile feedback via the inte-
grated vibration actuators. Consequently, such devices must easily integrate with
VIREO so that practitioners can readily test their vibrotactile pattern designs
and integrate those patterns into applications. The focus of VIREO on mobile
and wearable devices is motivated by the prevalence of the former and increas-
ing adoption of the latter in the context where smart wearables represent the
fastest-growing technological innovation for mobile users (Menear, 2020).
A simple way to implement DR4 is for the target device to support web standards (e.g.,
HTML), web languages (e.g.. JavaScript), and data-interchange formats designed for
the web (e.g., JSON), just like VIREO. This requirement is met by all smartphones
and by many wearables with integrated Wi-Fi functionality. Some wearables, such as
smartwatches running Tizen OS, can even be programmed with web technology alone,
such as HTML and JavaScript.10 Also, web languages are becoming increasingly pop-
ular among developers, e.g., “as of early 2020, JavaScript and HTML/CSS were the
most commonly used programming languages among software developers around the
world, with nearly 68 percent of respondents stating that they used JavaScript and
63.5 percent using HTML/CSS,” according to a Statista April 2021 report. 11 The
web-based orientation of VIREO (requirement DR 1) makes this desideratum easily
implementable on the web, i.e., target devices can access a dedicated web page gener-
ated automatically by VIREO that enables controlled access to vibrotactile patterns.
Thus, we add another requirement for VIREO that contours its scope more precisely:
10Tizen Studio enables development of web applications for mobile, wearable, and TV devices, which consist of
HTML, JavaScript, and CSS combined in a package deployed to a Tizen device; see https://docs.tizen.org/
application/web/index.
11Statista. Most used programming languages among developers worldwide, as of early 2020, https://
www.statista.com/statistics/793628/worldwide-developer-survey-most-used-languages .
11
DR5: JavaScript-orientation. Target devices that integrate with VIREO or for which
VIREO exports vibrotactile feedback patterns support JavaScript applications,
either natively or in a web browser.
Design requirements DR1 to DR3 ensure that VIREO is easily accessible to a large
category of practitioners that use diverse platforms and operating systems, while DR 4
and DR5 ensure that VIREO addresses uniformly a large category of mobile and wear-
able devices by leveraging their built-in web connectivity. Moreover, support for DR 5
can be found in previous initiatives in the HCI engineering community for JavaScript-
based development frameworks for wearables, such as Weave (Chi and Li, 2015) for
cross-wearable interaction, FlowIO (Shtarbanov, 2021) for wearable soft robotics, and
SAPIENS (Schipor, Vatavu, and Wu, 2019b) for peripheral interactions with mobile
and wearable devices, to name just a few examples.
3.2. Technical Implementation Details
We implemented VIREO using Node.js, 12 a popular cross-platform runtime environ-
ment based on JavaScript. For the back-end, we employed NestJS, 13 one of the most
popular Model-View-Controller frameworks for Node.js, enabling design and develop-
ment of eﬃcient and scalable applications for the web. We preferred NestJS since it
oﬀers a collection of handy, well-structured tools out of the box, such as WebSockets
and an API for CLI tools for best-practice architectural patterns and well-structured
web applications, among other useful features. We developed the client-side applica-
tion with VueJS,14 a fast and powerful JavaScript framework for reactive UIs so that
VIREO can be accessed from many devices with a uniform user experience. This choice
of technology enabled us to reuse JavaScript code between the server and client sides of
VIREO, reducing thus eﬀorts and resources for code writing and testing. To represent
vibrotactile patterns graphically in the UI, we employed Chart.js, 15 one of the most
popular JavaScript libraries for data visualization on the web. Moreover, Chart.js can
be easily extended via plugins, which allowed us to rapidly add the extra functionality
needed in our UI, such as direct manipulation of the individual models composing a
vibrotactile pattern, custom visualization eﬀects, and free-draw input directly on the
chart with the mouse, stylus, and ﬁnger. Next, we present user workﬂows in VIREO
and describe authoring techniques for vibrotactile feedback patterns.
3.3. User Workﬂows
To implement our design requirements DR 2 to DR4 (Subsection 3.1), we devised the
following main user workﬂows for VIREO (see Figure 2 for visual illustrations):
(a) A new user registers with VIREO. After logging in, the user gets access to a
workspace where they can create, edit, test, and export vibrotactile patterns.
The initial workspace contains an example of a vibrotactile pattern visualized
as a 1D signal on the time dimension. The pattern is simple—a linear model
followed by an exponentially decreasing one, describing the variation in vibration
intensity—with only few parameters to control, such as the slope for the linear
12Node.js, https://nodejs.org.
13NestJS - A progressive Node.js framework, https://nestjs.com.
14Vue.js, the progressive JavaScript framework, https://vuejs.org.
15Chart.js — Open source HTML5 Charts for your web site, https://www.chartjs.org.
12
model and the decay rate for the exponential model, respectively; see Figure 2a.
The user can play with these parameters to see their eﬀect, explore and add new
models, and save the pattern to their library.
(b) A registered user logs into their workspace in VIREO, where their previously
authored vibrotactile patterns are available in the form of a library of patterns.
The user can add, edit, and remove patterns; see Figure 2b. There are three
ways to author a new vibrotactile pattern in VIREO: (i) from scratch, by using
mathematical models, e.g., linear, exponential, harmonic, etc., (ii) from scratch,
by sketching the shape of the pattern with the mouse, stylus, or ﬁnger on the
screen, and (iii) by cloning an existing vibrotactile pattern from the library and
editing it anew.
(c) The user wishes to test how a selection of the vibrotactile patterns they created
with VIREO feels on a smartphone and a smartwatch, respectively. The user
adds those patterns from the library to a collection of patterns , for which a
quick access code is automatically generated by VIREO; see Figure 2c. From the
target device, VIREO is accessed with that code in the web browser, which gives
instant access to the patterns of the collection. The user can play the patterns
on the smartphone and smartwatch to evaluate their eﬀect.
(d) The user has decided on a collection of vibrotactile patterns to use in an ap-
plication targeting a speciﬁc device. They export the collection as a JavaScript
ﬁle that contains the patterns encoded in JSON, but also JavaScript code that
plays the patterns with the Vibration API, 16 a Web API compatible with many
platforms. The ﬁle is imported into the application that is being developed for
the target device; see the user workﬂow in Figure 2d.
(e) The user wants to share a subset of vibrotactile patterns from their VIREO
library with a colleague developer. They create a new collection, to which they
add the vibrotactile patterns they wish to share, and send the access code to their
colleague. With the access code, the second user can either play the vibrotactile
patterns on a target device or import them into their own library from their
VIREO workspace; see Figure 2e for the workﬂow.
We kept the user workﬂows simple and with few steps in order to ensure the func-
tionality planned for VIREO, according to our design requirements, with minimum
eﬀort expected from users. The most important feature of VIREO is authoring vi-
brotactile feedback patterns, for which we implemented several options: model-based
design and editing of model parameters, composition of multiple models, and free-draw
input for rapid speciﬁcation of vibrotactile feedback based on user demonstration. In
the following subsections, we present these features in detail.
3.4. Model-based Design of Vibrotactile Feedback
We deﬁne a vibrotactile pattern as a function of timeA(t) specifying the intensity of the
vibration, normalized between between 0 (no vibration) and 100 (vibration provided
at the maximum intensity of the actuator). For example, the function A(t) = 100t
⏐⏐2
0,
deﬁned over the time interval [0, 2s], speciﬁes a pattern that increases linearly over a
period of one second to the maximum intensity of the actuator, where it is capped
for another second. Individual patterns can be composed in order to generate more
complex patterns, i.e., A(t)=A1(t)+A2(t −τ), where τ speciﬁes the time oﬀset for the
16Vibration API - Web APIs, https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Vibration API.
13
Registration
The user registers 
with VIREO with an 
email account and 
password.
1 Meet the workspace
The user is presented 
with the workspace. 
One example pattern is 
in the workspace.
2
User exploration of the pattern & workspace3
3.1 Exploration of the example 
pattern
The user edits the parameter 
values of the models 
composing the example.
3.2 Exploration of new pattern 
models
The user selects new models, 
and edits the values of their 
parameters.
Save work
The user saves the 
pattern to the library.
4
a
EndStart
Start End 
Workspace with 
library of patterns 
The user has several 
vibrotactile patterns   
in their library, which 
they want to edit or 
expand with new ones. 
1 
Creation of a new vibrotactile pattern 2 
2.1 Pattern creation by 
composing models 
The user creates a new 
pattern by selecting and 
composing models. 
2.2 Pattern creation by free-
draw sketch input 
The user draws the shape of 
the pattern with the mouse 
or finger on the screen. 
2.3 Creation by reusing 
patterns from the library 
The user opens an existing 
pattern, saves it with a new 
name, and then edits it. 
Save work 
The user saves the 
pattern to the library. 
4 
Editing of an existing vibrotactile pattern 3 
3.1 Edit component 
The parameter values 
of a model component 
are modified to specify 
the component shape. 
3.2 Edit order of 
components 
The components are 
shifted on the time axis 
to specify the pattern.  
b 
Start End Workspace with 
library of patterns 
The user has several 
vibrotactile patterns   
in their library, which 
they want to test on a 
target device. 
1 Finalize the 
collection  
The user discards the 
collection or saves it for 
future rounds of testing. 
7 
c 
Create collection of 
patterns 
The user selects 
patterns to form a 
collection. VibroBoost 
creates a unique 
access code for the 
collection. 
2 Access the collection 
on the target device 
The user employs the 
target device to open a 
web page where the 
access code is entered to 
view the collection of 
vibrotactile patterns. 
3 New target device 
Test the vibrotactile 
patterns on a new 
target device. 
4 
6 Share the collection 
The user sends the access 
code to another person, 
which can view, test, and add 
the vibrotactile patterns to 
their library. 
e 
d 
5 
 Export the collection with source code 
The user downloads the collection of vibrotactile patterns integrated 
into JavaScript code that indexes and plays the items of the collection. 
Figure 2. Five user workﬂows, (a) to (e), implemented in VIREO; see Subsection 3.3 for details.
second pattern. For example, A1(t) is the linearly increasing pattern deﬁned before
and A2(t) is a fast exponentially decreasing signal, A2(t) = 100 e−3t, which starts
immediately after A1(t), i.e., τ = 2s, and decreases to zero in the following second:
A(t) = 100t
⏐⏐2
0 + 100e−3(t−2)⏐⏐3
2 deﬁned over the time interval [0, 3s]. This composition
rule applies for series of more than two patterns, as follows: A(t) =
n∑
i=1
Ai(t −τi)
⏐⏐t2i
t1i
,
where τi is the oﬀset of the i-th pattern of the composition deﬁned over the time
interval [t1i,t 2i]. Note that in the above mathematical formalism the patterns Ai(t)
are deﬁned only for positive t values, otherwise they compute to 0 (no vibration).
We implemented the following numerical models A(t) for vibrotactile patterns in
VIREO, for which we drew inspiration from prior software authoring tools, systems,
and studies implementing vibrotactile feedback (Boer et al., 2017; Hong et al., 2013;
Park and Choi, 2017; Pezent et al., 2021):
(1) Linear model. A(t) = at +b, where a and b are the slope and intercept. This
model can be used to create patterns of increasing ( a>0), decreasing (a<0), or
constant (a=0) intensity of the vibration that start at the intensity denoted by
14
Figure 3. Examples of vibrotactile patterns generated using the numerical models available in VIREO. From
top to bottom: linear, quadratic, exponential, logarithmic, and harmonic models with various parameters; see
the text for the corresponding formulae.
b; see the ﬁrst row in Figure 3 for a few examples.
(2) Quadratic model. A(t) = at2 +bt +c, a standard form expression that deﬁnes
a parabola with the axis of symmetry parallel to the vertical axis. The coeﬃ-
cient a controls the degree of curvature and its sign speciﬁes how the parabola
opens, either upwards ( a>0) or downwards ( a<0). Coeﬃcients a and b deter-
mine the location of the axis of symmetry ( −b/2a), and c speciﬁes the height of
the parabola when intercepting the vertical axis. This model generates vibration
patterns that increase or decrease with more degrees of freedom compared to
the linear model (e.g., A(t) = 100(t − 1)2 starts with a fast decrease in vibra-
tion intensity that attenuates progressively), but also symmetric patterns that
increase then decrease and vice versa (e.g., A(t) = −300t2 + 300t increases to
75% of the maximum vibration intensity of the actuator during the ﬁrst half of
a second and then decreases to zero in the next half); see the second row from
Figure 3 for more examples.
(3) Exponential model. A(t) = Amaxe−λt+D +c speciﬁes vibration intensity that
varies exponentially with time, where Amax denotes the maximum amplitude
and c is the intercept as in the previous models. This model can be used to
generate a variety of vibration patterns that increase or decrease at various rates
according to the λ and D parameters, e.g., A(t) =e2.5t+0.5 speciﬁes a vibration
that increases slowly from 0 to 50% of the maximum intensity of the actuator
over one and a half seconds; see the third row from Figure 3.
(4) Logarithmic model. A(t) = Amaxln(at) + c is the inverse of the exponential
model, useful to specify vibrations that increase at various rates then cap at
speciﬁc intensity values; see the fourth row from Figure 3.
(5) Harmonic model. A(t) = Amaxe−τtsin(2πωt) +c speciﬁes harmonic oscillations
with frequency ω. Amaxe−τt is an envelope function parameterized by the max-
imum intensity Amax and the decaying constant τ. This model can generate a
variety of patterns that involve oscillations; see the ﬁfth row from Figure 3 for
several examples.
Figure 4 shows how the parameter values are speciﬁed for models in VIREO. Also,
the patterns generated using these models can be combined to create increasingly more
15
Figure 4. Specifying parameter values, time oﬀset, and duration for numerical models in VIREO.
Figure 5. Examples of vibrotactile patterns authored with VIREO via pattern composition. Note: the colors
match those from Figure 3, e.g., red hues specify the linear model. Through composition, increasingly complex
vibration patterns can be authored in VIREO.
complex patterns; see Figure 5. The time oﬀset of the individual, simpler patterns can
be speciﬁed numerically or via direct manipulation with the mouse by dragging the
pattern to the desired location, where a magnetic eﬀect adjusts its position precisely.
3.5. Sketch-based Speciﬁcation of Vibrotactile Feedback
Model-based authoring of vibrotactile feedback produces numerically accurate spec-
iﬁcation of patterns of various complexity, as demonstrated in the previous section.
However, a use case that arises in practice is when the practitioner wishes to rapidly
test how a vibrotactile pattern feels like, without being concerned for the time being
by the exact mathematical modeling of that pattern. To support this requirement
(DR3), also useful for novice users, we implemented a free draw authoring feature,
where the user employs the mouse, stylus, or ﬁnger to draw the approximate shape
of the vibrotactile pattern on the screen; see Figure 6, left. VIREO approximates this
shape with rectangles of variable width (which are actually linear models with zero
slope), for which the minimum width can be speciﬁed by the practitioner, e.g., 50ms
for the example illustrated in Figure 6, right. Patterns created with free-draw input are
compatible for composition with other patterns since we implemented the free draw
feature just like any another model in VIREO.
3.6. Integrating Vibrotactile Feedback Patterns from VIREO in Mobile
and Wearable Applications
According to the user workﬂow illustrated in Figure 2d, collections of vibrotactile
patterns can be exported from VIREO in the form of a JavaScript ﬁle. The ﬁle contains
an array of patterns speciﬁed as a series of vibration intensities and corresponding
time duration. This intermediate representation (see Figure 6, right for an example)
is an approximation of the pattern waveform from VIREO that is convenient for
rendering vibrotactile feedback with the Vibration Web API on mobile and wearable
16
  
Figure 6. Left: free-draw pattern authoring in VIREO with the mouse, stylus, or ﬁnger directly on the screen.
Right: an approximation of the pattern from the left image with rectangles (linear models with zero slope).
devices supporting JavaScript, either as standalone applications or in the web browser.
However, since the Vibration API only accepts patterns represented as series of on-oﬀ
pulses,17 we simulate vibration intensity with pulse-width modulation (PWM) (Barr,
2001). Listing 1 shows an example of JavaScript code exported from VIREO. The
object vireo exposes the method toNavigatorFormat(patternName) that takes as
a parameter the name of the vibrotactile pattern and implements PWM to convert
vibration intensities from the pattern representation into on-oﬀ pulses expected by
the navigator.vibrate(...) function of the Vibration Web API; see Listing 2. The
navigatorVibrate(patternName) method calls navigator.vibrate(...) directly.
1 const V I R E O P a t t e r n s = {
2 " Start " : [
3 { i n t e n s i t y :84 , du ra tio n :100} , { i n t e n s i t y :83 , du ra tio n :50} ,
4 { i n t e n s i t y :33 , du ra tio n :100} , { i n t e n s i t y :84 , du ra tio n :100} ,
5 { i n t e n s i t y :83 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :33 , du rat io n :100} ,
6 { i n t e n s i t y :84 , du ra tio n :100} , { i n t e n s i t y :83 , du ra tio n :50} ,
7 { i n t e n s i t y :33 , du ra tio n :100} , { i n t e n s i t y :84 , du ra tio n :100} ,
8 { i n t e n s i t y :83 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :33 , du rat io n :100}
9 ] ,
10 " Game over " : [
11 { i n t e n s i t y :58 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :55 , du rat io n :50} ,
12 { i n t e n s i t y :53 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :52 , du rat io n :50} ,
13 { i n t e n s i t y :51 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :51 , du rat io n :50} ,
14 { i n t e n s i t y :50 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :50 , du rat io n :50} ,
15 { i n t e n s i t y :50 , du ra tio n :100} , { i n t e n s i t y :95 , du ra tio n :50} ,
16 { i n t e n s i t y :85 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :75 , du rat io n :50} ,
17 { i n t e n s i t y :65 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :55 , du rat io n :50} ,
18 { i n t e n s i t y :45 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :35 , du rat io n :50} ,
19 { i n t e n s i t y :25 , du ra tio n :50} , { i n t e n s i t y :10 , du rat io n :100}
20 ]
21 };
22 fu nc tio n t o N a v i g a t o r F o r m a t ( p a t t e r n N a m e ) { ... }
23 fu nc tio n n a v i g a t o r V i b r a t e ( p a t t e r n N a m e ) { ... }
24 fu nc tio n vireo () { ... }
25 export default vireo ;
Listing 1 Excerpt of JavaScript code with a collection of vibrotactile patterns exported from VIREO.
1 import vireo from " ./ exported - pat te rns " ;
2
3 const pattern = vireo . t o N a v i g a t o r F o r m a t ( " Start " );
17https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Vibration API
17
4 n a v i g a t o r . vibrate ( pattern );
5
6 // or
7 // vireo . n a v i g a t o r V i b r a t e (" Start ");
Listing 2 Excerpt of JavaScript code used in end-user applications.
4. Demonstrative Applications
We demonstrate in this section how VIREO can be used for practical implementa-
tion of vibrotactile feedback in user interfaces for mobile and wearable devices, and
present applications for a smartphone, smartwatch, smart armband, and pair of smart-
glasses. Note that our goal in this section is not to focus on design choices for various
mappings between application events and vibration patterns (that have been exam-
ined thoroughly elsewhere in the scientiﬁc literature (Boer et al., 2017; Brewster and
Brown, 2004; Cauchard, Cheng, Pietrzak, and Landay, 2016; Plaisier, Holt, and Kap-
pers, 2020; Seiﬁ et al., 2015; Shiraga, Kinoshita, and Go, 2016; Vyas, Taha, Blum, and
Cooperstock, 2020)), but rather to demonstrate the versatility of our web-based ap-
proach adopted for VIREO to readily implement vibrotactile feedback for mobile and
wearable interactions. To this end, we employ the VibViz library (Seiﬁ et al., 2015) to
identify vibration patterns possessing diverse functional and aﬀective characteristics
suited to our application types.
4.1. Vibrotactile Feedback for a Smartphone Video Game
We implemented the classical Snake18 game, where the user maneuvers a continuously
moving snake, and tries to catch apples to accumulate points, while the snake’s body
grows in length. We chose three game events to augment with vibrotactile feedback:
the snake changes its direction of movement following user input, points are awarded
when apples are eaten, and the game is over. Figure 7a illustrates the corresponding
vibrotactile patterns, which we chose from the VibViz (Seiﬁ et al., 2015) library by
using the keyword “game.” For example, when points are awarded to the user after
the snake has eaten an apple, a vibration pattern is rendered with a happy connota-
tion (Seiﬁ et al., 2015), while the “game over” event has a pattern suggesting sadness,
but also encouragement. Since VibViz does not provide numerical descriptions of these
patterns, we speciﬁed them with the numerical models available in VIREO, e.g., we
created the “game over” pattern by combining an exponential model (10e−10t +50
⏐⏐0.5
0 )
with a linear one ( −200t + 100
⏐⏐1
0.5) and the “points awarded” pattern with three
consecutive linear models (650 t
⏐⏐0.15
0 , 650(t − 0.15)
⏐⏐0.30
0.15, and 650( t − 0.3)
⏐⏐0.45
0.30) and a
triangle composed of a linearly increasing and decreasing model (650(t −0.45)
⏐⏐0.60
0.45 and
−650(t − 0.60) + 97.5
⏐⏐0.75
0.60). The same results were obtained, with unnoticeable diﬀer-
ences, when we recreated these patterns in VIREO with the free-draw input technique,
which approximated the drawings with 50ms-long rectangles as in Figure 6, right.
18Snake (video game genre) - Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake (video game genre).
18
Change in 
direction 
Points 
awarded 
Game over Start 
running 
Light encour 
agement 
Strong encour 
agement 
Personal 
record 
achieved 
About 2/3 of the 
points of interest are 
not visible 
About 1/3 of the  
points of interest are 
not visible 
Very few points of 
interest are still  
not visible 
Selection confirmation 
for a point of interest 
a b 
c d 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
8 
 9 
 10 11 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
8 9 10 11 8 9 10 11 
Figure 7. Applications for a smartphone, smartwatch, smart armband, and smartglasses, respectively, for
which we integrated patterns from VIREO to provide vibrotactile feedback to the user corresponding to var-
ious application events, e.g., notiﬁcation of “points awarded” in a mobile game or a “strong encouragement”
vibration as a motivation during jogging for a smartwatch user.
4.2. Delivery of Notiﬁcations on Smartwatches
We implemented a smartwatch application for joggers. We used Tizen Studio to
develop a HTML/CSS/JavaScript web application that we deployed to a Samsung
Galaxy Watch 3. The application monitors running time and provides the user with
vibrotactile feedback according to speciﬁc milestones: start of the running exercise,
light and strong encouragements when the running time approaches predeﬁned mile-
stones, such as 15 and 30 minutes, and achieving a new personal record of running
time. We created vibrotactile patterns for these events in VIREO using composition of
the linear, logarithmic, and harmonic models, respectively; see Figure 7b for a visual
illustration of these patterns and our smartwatch application. For example, we created
the vibration for “light encouragement” with a logarithmic model (23ln(750t)
⏐⏐0.10
0 ) fol-
lowed by a linear model ( −670(t − 0.10) + 100
⏐⏐0.25
0.10), to suggest positive emotion (Seiﬁ
et al., 2015) to the user.
19
4.3. Augmenting Touch Input on Interactive Tabletops with a Wearable
Device and Vibrotactile Feedback
For our next demonstration, we considered an information visualization application
running on an Ideum interactive tabletop, for which we enhanced multitouch input
with vibrotactile feedback delivered on the user’s hand. We developed a web appli-
cation displaying a map with touristic points of interest indicated by colored circles;
see Figure 7c. The user employs zoom-in and zoom-out multitouch gestures to browse
regions of the map. However, because of the large number of points of interest, not all
of them can be eﬀectively presented visually at once on the map. Rather, some points
come into view and others are hidden as the user zooms in into a speciﬁc region of
the map. To inform the user about how many points of interest are available in that
region, even if not all of them are visible, we provided vibrations on the user’s arm
with the Myo 19 armband and the corresponding Myo JavaScript API. We selected
four application events to augment with vibrotactile feedback when the user touches
the screen (denoted by numbers 8 to 11 in Figure 7c): many points of interest are
available around the touch point but are hidden from view, some points of interest
are available, very few points are still hidden from view, and selection conﬁrmation
for a point of interest. We designed those patterns in VIREO using composition of
the linear, exponential, and harmonic models, respectively, to suggest the metaphor-
ical connotations (Seiﬁ et al., 2015) of diﬀerent amounts of data. For example, the
vibration pattern with two spikes was speciﬁed in VIREO by composing exponential
(e19.6(t−0.1) + 49
⏐⏐0.30
0.10) and linear ( −333.3(t − 0.3) + 100
⏐⏐0.45
0.30) models.
4.4. Vibrotactile Feedback on Smartglasses
As a ﬁnal demonstration, we accessed the interactive map web application presented in
Subsection 4.3 from the Vuzix Blade 20 smartglasses, a device with see-through lenses
and integrated touchpad and vibration motors in the temple; see Figure 7d. The small
display of the glasses device exacerbated the visualization problem about too many
points of interest to be visualized at once on the map. Since Vuzix Blade can run a
web browser that supports JavaScript and the Vibration Web API, our application ran
on the smartglasses without any adaptation, delivering the four types of vibrotactile
feedback patterns to the user when touching the glasses temple.
4.5. Summary
All the applications presented in this section were developed using HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript either as standalone applications (e.g., for the Galaxy Watch 3) or appli-
cations on the web that can be accessed with a web browser (for the smartphone,
tabletop, and smartglasses demonstrators, respectively). Our goal with these applica-
tions was to highlight the practicality and feasibility of the DR 5 design requirement
for VIREO: by leveraging the built-in capacity of mobile and wearable devices to con-
nect to the web and support JavaScript, vibrotactile feedback can be straightforwardly
integrated in applications targeting such devices.
19https://developerblog.myo.com
20https://www.vuzix.com/products/blade-smart-glasses-upgraded
20
Gender distribution
JavaScript Java C# C++
Python
Python PHP C
Typescript BashRuby
VB.NET
Haskell R
ObjectiveC
10 
7.5 
5 
2.5 
0 
4.19 years
(any language)
1.43 years
(JavaScript)
Programming experience (years) Programming proficiency level
3.00 out of 5 
(preferred language)
2.31 out of 5 
(JavaScript)
1 - Fundamental awareness |2 - Novice  | 3 - Intermediate |4 - Advanced | 5 - Expert
Known programming languages
Figure 8. Demographic details of the participants from our usability study.
Figure 9. The task for the usability study was to employ VIREO to author the three vibrotactile patterns
illustrated in this ﬁgure. From left to right, the complexity of the vibration patterns increases from one model
to a combination of linear models to a combination of diﬀerent models (right).
5. User Study
We conducted a user study with coders with various levels of experience in various
programming languages to evaluate the usability of VIREO as a software tool on the
web for authoring vibrotactile feedback for applications on mobile devices. The study
was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Suceava, ref. 50/21.01.2022.
5.1. Participants
We recruited a total number of sixteen participants from our University’s student body
with an announcement on an email list. Ten participants (62.5%) declared themselves
as male and six (37.5%) as female. Their age range was between 21 and 34 years
(M=25.6, SD=3.4 years). All of the participants were Computer Science students hav-
ing up to ten years of programming experience (M=4.2, SD=3.0 years) with a diversity
of programming languages and platforms. Their average self-reported programming
proﬁciency level was 3.00 (SD=1.03) on a scale from 1 (“fundamental awareness”) to
2 (“novice”), 3 (“intermediate”), 4 (“advanced”) to 5 (“expert”). Our participants self-
reported experience with JavaScript, the programming language of choice for VIREO,
was up to four years (M=1.4, SD=1.6 years) and their average JavaScript proﬁciency
level was 2.31 (SD=1.25) reported on the scale ranging from 1 (“fundamental aware-
ness”) to 5 (“expert”). A number of eight participants (50%) were also working in
the software industry as software developers, engineers, and quality assurance testers.
None of the participants had used software tools for designing vibrotactile feedback
before our study. Figure 8 shows the demographic details of our sample of participants.
21
5.2. Procedure and Task
The study was conducted entirely online. Registration to the study was done via a
Google Forms questionnaire that collected the email addresses of the volunteers. We
created individual login accounts in VIREO for each participant and sent the login
details to the email addresses they used to register for the study. A second Google
Forms document secured the informed consent from the registered participants that
responded to our follow-up email. Upon login, the participants were provided a tutorial
of VIREO and a 3-minute long video demonstrating how to use VIREO to create
vibrotactile feedback patterns and collections of patterns. The instructions given to
the participants were to freely explore VIREO and, once they felt they understood
how it worked, they had to author three vibrotactile patterns with diﬀerent levels of
complexity (see Figure 9) and add them to a collection. To enable the participants to
easily test the vibrotactile patterns on their smartphone, we also provided the snake
video game described in Section 4 already set up to play the three vibrotactile patterns
from Figure 9. We did not impose any time constraints on the exploration of VIREO
or on performing the vibrotactile pattern authoring task. When we analyzed the logs
automatically captured during the study, we found that the participants spent on
average 88 minutes with VIREO. After the participants ﬁnished the task, they were
asked to ﬁll in a Google Forms questionnaire that collected their experience using
VIREO with speciﬁc measures, presented in detail next.
5.3. Measures
We collected the following measures during our study:
(1) SUS, the System Usability Scale (Brooke, 1996), a 10-item instrument for evalu-
ating overall usability. For each item of SUS, the degree of agreement is entered
using a 5-point Likert scale with responses ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”)
to 5 (“strongly agree”). The individual responses are aggregated into a score
ranging from 0 (low usability) to 100 (perfect score).
(2) CSUQ, the Computer System Usability Questionnaire (Lewis, 1995), 21 a 19-item
instrument for assessing overall user satisfaction with system usability that pro-
vides four scores: overall usability (CSUQ-Overall), system usefulness (CSUQ-
SysUse), information quality (CSUQ-InfoQual), and interface quality (CSUQ-
InterQual). For each item of CSUQ, the degree of agreement is entered using
a 7-point Likert scale with possible responses ranging from 1 (“strongly agree”)
to 7 (“strongly disagree”) and a “not applicable” point outside the scale. Lower
scores denote better usability.
(3) Perceived-Difficulty-Models. We evaluated the perceived diﬃculty of em-
ploying mathematical models to author vibrotactile feedback patterns in VIREO
(see Subsection 3.4), which we measured with a 5-point Likert scale with items
from 1 (“not diﬃcult”) to 2 (“little diﬃcult”), 3 (“moderately diﬃcult”), 4 (“dif-
ﬁcult”) to 5 (“very diﬃcult”) in response to the question “How would you rate
the use of mathematical models for creating vibrotactile patterns in VIREO?”
(4) Perceived-Difficulty-FreeSketch. We evaluated the perceived diﬃculty
of employing the free-sketch option to author vibrotactile feedback patterns in
VIREO (see Subsection 3.5), which we measured with a 5-point Likert scale with
21We used the CSUQ version instead of PSSUQ by following the recommendation from (Lewis, 1995, p. 77)
to apply CSUQ when the usability study is in a nonlaboratory setting, which was the case for our study.
22
items ranging from 1 (“not diﬃcult at all”) to 5 (“very diﬃcult”) in response to
the question “How would you rate the free-sketch option for creating vibrotactile
patterns in VIREO?”
5.4. Results
The average SUS score was 70.47 (SD=24.63), representing a relatively high value
falling in the “acceptable” range and located close to the “good” usability mark on
the SUS scale, respectively, according to the acceptability ranges 22 and adjective rat-
ings23 for interpreting SUS scores from (Bangor et al., 2009; Bangor, Kortum, and
Miller, 2008). Also, the average CSUQ- Overall score was 2.68 (SD=1.41), located
in the ﬁrst part of the 7-point CSUQ scale (lower values that are closer to 1 denote
better performance). The scores obtained on each CSUQ subscale were of a similar
magnitude: 2.74 for CSUQ-SysUse (SD=1.59), 2.75 for CSUQ-InfoQual (SD=1.37),
and 2.40 for CSUQ- InterQual (SD=1.41), respectively. By converting the CSUQ-
Overall score to a 0-100 scale (Lewis, 2018a, p. 6), we obtained 70.96 (SD=26.52),
a value nearly identical with the one obtained with SUS. These results show a good
overall usability for the task of authoring vibrotactile feedback patterns with VIREO,
conﬁrmed by two popular usability tests.
To understand the eﬀect of our participants’ programming experience and pro-
gramming proﬁciency levels on perceived usability, we divided the participants into
two groups, beginners and advanced, by applying the following rule: a participant was
in the advanced group if they had at least ﬁve years of programming experience or
their self-declared programming proﬁciency level was at least 4 (“Advanced, I can suc-
cessfully apply theory concepts”). By applying this rule, we obtained two equally-sized
groups with eight participants each: beginners (M=1.75, SD=1.17 years of program-
ming experience and M=2.25, SD=0.89 on the programming proﬁciency scale) and
advanced (M=6.63, SD=2.13 years of programming experience and M=3.75, SD=0.46
on the programming proﬁciency scale). Mann-Whitney U tests did not ﬁnd a sta-
tistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of the programming experience on the SUS (U=25.000,
Z=-0.738, p=.505, n.s.) or CSUQ (U=31.000, Z=-0.105, p=.959, n.s.) scores. These
results suggest a similar level of perceived usability for both beginners and advanced
programmers, but further evaluations with larger user groups are recommended.
Regarding the actual method to author vibrotactile patterns, i.e., model-based
or free-sketch input, we found an average Perceived-Difficulty-Models of 1.88
(Mdn=2) and an average Perceived-Difficulty-FreeSketch of 2.31 (Mdn=2),
both close to the “little diﬃcult” anchor from the 5-point Likert scale used to
evaluate these measures. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test did not detect any sta-
tistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two authoring methods ( Z= − 1.567,
p=.117>.05, n.s.). Also, Mann-Whitney U tests did not detect any statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀects of the programming experience, beginners and advanced, on
Perceived-Difficulty-Models (U=26.000, Z=-0.732,p=.574, n.s.) or Perceived-
Difficulty-FreeSketch (U=30.000, Z=-0.217, p=.878, n.s.), respectively.
22According to the standard letter grade scale for interpreting SUS scores (Bangor, Kortum, and Miller, 2009),
products that score in the 90s are “exceptional,” products that score in the 80s are “good,” and products that
score in the 70s are “acceptable”; also see Lewis (2018b).
23According to Bangor et al. (2009), the correspondence between adjective ratings and mean SUS scores
are: “worst imaginable” (M=12.5, SD=13.1), “awful” (M=20.3, SD=11.3), “poor” (M=35.7, SD=12.6), “OK”
(M=50.9, SD=13.8), “good” (M=71.4, SD=11.6), “excellent” (M=85.5, SD=10.4), and “best imaginable”
(M=90.9, SD=13.4); also see Lewis (2018b).
23
6. Limitations
There are a few limitations to VIREO, which we acknowledge in this section. First,
our implementation leveraging JavaScript and the Vibration API enables us to ad-
dress a variety of mobile and wearable devices, but also limits the applicability of
VIREO to those devices that support the API. Although a large number of devices
and platforms are implicitly supported, e.g., browser compatibility speciﬁcations 24
include Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Opera, WebView Android, Chrome Android, Opera
Android, and Samsung Internet, other platforms and browsers, such as Internet Ex-
plorer, Safari, and Safari on iOS, are not. For these platforms, future work will look at
generating platform-speciﬁc code for integrating vibrotactile patterns authored with
VIREO (Subsection 3.6). Second, VIREO does not dispose yet of a set of predeﬁned vi-
brotactile patterns to start oﬀ the authoring process, although such a feature would be
helpful for rapid prototyping alongside our free-sketch input method (Subsection 3.5).
We will address this limitation in future versions of VIREO. In the next section, we
present more future work opportunities.
7. Conclusion and F uture W ork
We introduced VIREO, a tool for the web that enables design of vibrotactile feedback
patterns and easy deployment and integration of those patterns in applications tar-
geting mobile and wearable devices with web connectivity and support for JavaScript.
We also presented the results of a SLR study conducted to analyze and understand
contributions in the scientiﬁc community regarding tools and platforms that enable
authoring and implementation of vibrotactile feedback. Due to its web-based orien-
tation and speciﬁc focus on mobile and wearable devices, VIREO stands out distinc-
tively in this landscape. Moreover, we make VIREO freely available to researchers and
practitioners. Future work will consider several new features that we plan for the next
versions of VIREO, as follows: (1) integration with web-based software architecture for
implementing interactions in smart environments (Schipor, Vatavu, and Vanderdon-
ckt, 2019a; Schipor et al., 2019b) to extend the range of possible mobile and wearable
applications of VIREO in the context of ambient intelligence, (2) integration with Vir-
tual and Augmented Reality applications, such as applications running on Microsoft
HoloLens and HTC Vive, for which WebSocket-based communications can be used to
integrate directly with the collections of patterns from VIREO, and (3) extension of
VIREO with a library of vibrotactile patterns as a starting point for practitioners to
customize vibration patterns for their applications.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of a project that has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 860114.
24Details available at https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Vibration API. Also see https:
//caniuse.com/vibration for more details and tests.
24
Notes on contributors
Mihail Terenti is a Marie Sk lodowska-Curie Early Stage Researcher at the S ¸tefan cel
Mare University of Suceava, Romania, where he works on multimodal feedback to
augment the user experience of touch input.
Radu-Daniel Vatavu is a Professor of Computer Science at the S ¸tefan cel Mare
University of Suceava, where he directs the Machine Intelligence and Information Vi-
sualization Research Laboratory. His research interests include human-computer in-
teraction, augmented reality, ambient intelligence, and accessible computing.
References
Anderson, F., Grossman, T., Wigdor, D., Fitzmaurice, G., 2015. Supporting subtlety
with deceptive devices and illusory interactions. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, p. 1489–1498.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702336
Bangor, A., Kortum, P., Miller, J., 2009. Determining what individual SUS scores
mean: Adding an adjective rating scale. J. Usability Studies 4 (3), 114–123.
URL https://uxpajournal.org/determining-what-individual-sus-scores-
mean-adding-an-adjective-rating-scale
Bangor, A., Kortum, P. T., Miller, J. T., 2008. An empirical evaluation of the system
usability scale. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 24 (6), 574–
594.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10447310802205776
Barr, M., September 2001. Pulse width modulation. Embedded Systems Programming,
103–104.
Basdogan, C., Giraud, F., Levesque, V., Choi, S., 2020. A review of surface haptics:
Enabling tactile eﬀects on touch surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Haptics 13 (3),
450–470.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/toh.2020.2990712
Boer, L., Vallg˚ arda, A., Cahill, B., 2017. Giving form to a hedonic haptics player.
In: Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. DIS ’17.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 903–914.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064792
Brewster, S., Brown, L. M., 2004. Tactons: Structured tactile messages for non-visual
information display. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Australasian User
Interface - Volume 28. AUIC ’04. Australian Computer Society, Inc., AUS, p. 15–23.
Brezolin, F. L., Santos, G., de Lima, J. C., Zanella, M., Rieder, R., De Marchi, A.
C. B., 2017. Evaluating the performance of wearable tecassist device using aural
and tactile feedbacks. In: Proceedings of the XVI Brazilian Symposium on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. IHC 2017. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3160504.3160574
Brooke, J., 1996. SUS: A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale. In: Jordan, P. W., Thomas,
B., McClelland, I. L., Weerdmeester, B. (Eds.), Usability Evaluation in Industry.
CRC Press, London, UK, p. 189–194.
URL https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.1201/
9781498710411-35/susquick-dirty-usability-scale-john-brooke
Casamassima, F., Ferrari, A., Milosevic, B., Rocchi, L., Farella, E., 2013. Wearable
25
audio-feedback system for gait rehabilitation in subjects with Parkinson’s disease.
In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Com-
puting Adjunct Publication. UbiComp ’13 Adjunct. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p.
275–278.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2494091.2494178
Cauchard, J. R., Cheng, J. L., Pietrzak, T., Landay, J. A., 2016. ActiVibe: Design and
Evaluation of Vibrations for Progress Monitoring. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
p. 3261–3271.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858046
Chen, M., Ma, Y., Li, Y., Wu, D., Zhang, Y., Youn, C.-H., Jan. 2017. Wearable 2.0:
Enabling human-cloud integration in next generation healthcare systems. Comm.
Mag. 55 (1), 54–61.
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600410CM
Chen, X., Chen, W., Liu, K., Chen, C., Li, L., 2021. A comparative study of smart-
phone and smartwatch apps. In: Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium
on Applied Computing. SAC ’21. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1484–1493.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3412841.3442023
Chi, P.-Y. P., Li, Y., 2015. Weave: Scripting cross-device wearable interaction. In:
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 3923–3932.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702451
Clark, B., Schneider, O. S., MacLean, K. E., Tan, H. Z., 2017. Predictable and dis-
tinguishable morphing of vibrotactile rhythm. In: Proceedings of the IEEE World
Haptics Conference. WHC ’17. pp. 84–89.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2017.7989881
Danieau, F., Guillotel, P., Dumas, O., Lopez, T., Leroy, B., Mollet, N., 2018. HFX
Studio: haptic editor for full-body immersive experiences. In: Proceedings of the
24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. VRST ’18.
ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3281505.3281518
Dong, H., Gao, Y., Al Osman, H., El Saddik, A., 2015. Development of a web-based
haptic authoring tool for multimedia applications. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
International Symposium on Multimedia. ISM ’15. pp. 13–20.
Eid, M., Andrews, S., Alamri, A., El Saddik, A., 2008. HAMLAT: A HAML-Based
Authoring Tool for Haptic Application Development. In: Ferre, M. (Ed.), Haptics:
Perception, Devices and Scenarios. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 857–866.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-69057-3 108
Enriquez, M., MacLean, K., 2003. The hapticon editor: a tool in support of haptic com-
munication research. In: Proceedings of the 11th Symposium on Haptic Interfaces
for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems. HAPTICS ’03. pp. 356–362.
Furini, M., Mirri, S., Montangero, M., Prandi, C., 2020. Can IoT Wearable Devices
Feed Frugal Innovation? In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Experiences with
the Design and Implementation of Frugal Smart Objects. FRUGALTHINGS’20.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1–6.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3410670.3410861
Han, T., Han, Q., Annett, M., Anderson, F., Huang, D.-Y., Yang, X.-D., 2017. Frictio:
Passive kinesthetic force feedback for smart ring output. In: Proceedings of the 30th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. UIST ’17.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 131–142.
26
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3126594.3126622
Heller, F., Vanacken, D., Geurts, E., Luyten, K., 2020. Impact of situational impair-
ment on interaction with wearable displays. In: Proceedings of the 22nd Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Ser-
vices. MobileHCI ’20. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3406324.3410540
Hong, K., Lee, J., Choi, S., 2013. Demonstration-based vibrotactile pattern authoring.
In: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and
Embodied Interaction. TEI ’13. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 219–222.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2460625.2460660
Huang, D.-Y., Chan, L., Jian, X.-F., Chang, C.-Y., Chen, M.-H., Yang, D.-N.,
Hung, Y.-P., Chen, B.-Y., 2016. VibroPlay: Authoring Three-Dimensional Spatial-
Temporal Tactile Eﬀects with Direct Manipulation. In: SIGGRAPH ASIA 2016
Emerging Technologies. SA ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2988240.2988250
Israr, A., Zhao, S., Schneider, O., 2015. Exploring embedded haptics for social network-
ing and interactions. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’15. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, p. 1899–1904.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732814
Jones, L. A., Dec. 2016. Perspectives on the evolution of tactile, haptic, and thermal
displays. Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 25 (3), 247–252.
URL https://doi.org/10.1162/PRES{ }a{ }00266
Kang, N., Lee, S., 2018. A meta-analysis of recent studies on haptic feedback en-
hancement in immersive-augmented reality. In: Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Virtual Reality. ICVR 2018. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 3–9.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3198910.3198911
Kim, Y., Cha, J., Ryu, J., Oakley, I., 2010. A tactile glove design and authoring system
for immersive multimedia. IEEE MultiMedia 17 (3), 34–45.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MMUL.2010.5692181
Le, K.-D., Zhu, K., Kosinski, T., Fjeld, M., Azh, M., Zhao, S., 2016. Ubitile: A ﬁnger-
worn I/O device for tabletop vibrotactile pattern authoring. In: Proceedings of the
9th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. NordiCHI ’16. ACM, New
York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2996721
Lee, J., Choi, S., 2012. Evaluation of vibrotactile pattern design using vibrotactile
score. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Haptics Symposium. HAPTICS ’12. pp. 231–
238.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAPTIC.2012.6183796
Lee, J., Ryu, J., Choi, S., 2009a. Graphical authoring tools for vibrotactile patterns.
In: Proceedings of the 3rd Joint EuroHaptics conference and Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics ’09.
pp. 388–389.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2009.4810912
Lee, J., Ryu, J., Choi, S., 2009b. Vibrotactile score: A score metaphor for designing
vibrotactile patterns. In: World Haptics 2009 - Third Joint EuroHaptics conference
and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator
Systems. pp. 302–307.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2009.4810816
Lewis, J. R., 1995. IBM computer usability satisfaction questionnaires: Psychometric
27
evaluation and instructions for use. International Journal of Human–Computer In-
teraction 7 (1), 57–78.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447319509526110
Lewis, J. R., 2018a. Measuring Perceived Usability: The CSUQ, SUS, and UMUX.
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 34 (12), 1148–1156.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2017.1418805
Lewis, J. R., 2018b. The system usability scale: Past, present, and future. International
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 34 (7), 577–590.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2018.1455307
Liberati, A., Altman, D., Tetzlaﬀ, J., Mulrow, C., Gøtzsche, P., Ioannidis, J., Clarke,
M., Devereaux, P., Kleijnen, J., Moher, D., 08 2009. The PRISMA statement for
reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care
interventions: Explanation and elaboration. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 62,
e1–34.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.06.006
Mart´ ınez, J., Garc´ ıa, A. S., Oliver, M., Molina, J. P., Gonz´ alez, P., 2014. VITAKI:
A vibrotactile prototyping toolkit for virtual reality and video games. International
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 30 (11), 855–871.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2014.941272
Matulic, F., Ganeshan, A., Fujiwara, H., Vogel, D., 2021. Phonetroller: Visual Rep-
resentations of Fingers for Precise Touch Input with Mobile Phones in VR. In:
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
CHI ’21. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445583
Menear, H., November 2020. Wearables could replace the smartphone sooner than
you think. Mobile Magazine (Nov. 2020).
URL https://mobile-magazine.com/connectivity/wearables-could-
replace-smartphone-sooner-you-think
Olsson, P., Nysj¨ o, F., Singh, N., Thor, A., Carlbom, I., 2015. Visuohaptic bone saw
simulator: Combining vibrotactile and kinesthetic feedback. In: SIGGRAPH Asia
2015 Technical Briefs. SA ’15. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2820903.2820925
Pan¨ eels, S., Anastassova, M., Brunet, L., 2013. TactiPEd: Easy Prototyping of Tactile
Patterns. In: Kotz´ e, P., Marsden, G., Lindgaard, G., Wesson, J., Winckler, M. (Eds.),
Human-Computer Interaction. INTERACT ’13. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.
228–245.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40480-1 15
Park, G., Choi, S., 2017. A physics-based vibrotactile feedback library for collision
events. IEEE Transactions on Haptics 10 (3), 325–337.
Park, G., Choi, S., Hwang, K., Kim, S., Sa, J., Joung, M., 2011. Tactile eﬀect design
and evaluation for virtual buttons on a mobile device touchscreen. In: Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services. MobileHCI ’11. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 11–20.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037376
Park, T., Hwang, J., Hwang, W., 2009. Facilitating the design of vibration for handheld
devices. In: Jacko, J. A. (Ed.), Human-Computer Interaction. Novel Interaction
Methods and Techniques. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 496–502.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02577-8 54
Pezent, E., Cambio, B., O’Malley, M. K., 2021. Syntacts: Open-source software and
hardware for audio-controlled haptics. IEEE Transactions on Haptics 14 (1), 225–
28
233.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2020.3002696
Plaisier, M. A., Holt, R. J., Kappers, A. M., 2020. Representing numerosity through
vibration patterns. IEEE Transactions on Haptics 13 (4), 691–698.
Pohl, H., Muresan, A., Hornbæk, K., 2019. Charting subtle interaction in the HCI
literature. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1–15.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300648
Ryu, J., Choi, S., 2008. posVibEditor: Graphical authoring tool of vibrotactile pat-
terns. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Haptic Audio visual
Environments and Games. pp. 120–125.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAVE.2008.4685310
Sani, A. A., Boos, K., Yun, M. H., Zhong, L., Jun. 2015. Rio: I/O sharing between
mobile systems. GetMobile: Mobile Comp. and Comm. 19 (1), 6–9.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2786984.2786987
Schipor, O.-A., Vatavu, R.-D., Vanderdonckt, J., 2019a. Euphoria: A scalable, event-
driven architecture for designing interactions across heterogeneous devices in smart
environments. Information and Software Technology 109, 43–59.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2019.01.006
Schipor, O.-A., Vatavu, R.-D., Wu, W., Jun. 2019b. SAPIENS: towards software ar-
chitecture to support peripheral interaction in smart environments. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3 (EICS).
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3331153
Schneegass, S., Poguntke, R., Machulla, T., 2019. Understanding the impact of infor-
mation representation on willingness to share information. In: Proceedings of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, p. 1–6.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300753
Schneider, O. S., Israr, A., MacLean, K. E., 2015. Tactile animation by direct manip-
ulation of grid displays. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software & Technology. UIST ’15. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p.
21–30.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807470
Schneider, O. S., MacLean, K. E., 2014. Improvising design with a haptic instrument.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Haptics Symposium. HAPTICS ’14. pp. 327–332.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAPTICS.2014.6775476
Schneider, O. S., MacLean, K. E., 2016. Studying design process and example use
with Macaron, a web-based vibrotactile eﬀect editor. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Haptics Symposium. HAPTICS ’16. pp. 52–58.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAPTICS.2016.7463155
Sch¨ onauer, C., Mossel, A., Zaiti, I.-A., Vatavu, R.-D., 2015. Touch, movement and vi-
bration: User perception of vibrotactile feedback for touch and mid-air gestures. In:
Abascal, J., Barbosa, S., Fetter, M., Gross, T., Palanque, P., Winckler, M. (Eds.),
Human-Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2015. Springer International Publish-
ing, Cham, pp. 165–172.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22723-8 14
Seiﬁ, H., Zhang, K., MacLean, K. E., 2015. VibViz: Organizing, visualizing and nav-
igating vibration libraries. In: Proceedings of the IEEE World Haptics Conference.
WHC ’15. pp. 254–259.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2015.7177722
29
Shiraga, S., Kinoshita, Y., Go, K., 2016. Designing smartphone feedback based on vi-
bration impression. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
p. 3190–3196.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892430
Shtarbanov, A., 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic ”Raspberry Pi”
for Soft Robotics. In: Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
Siddaway, A. P., Wood, A. M., Hedges, L. V., 2019. How to do a systematic review: A
best practice guide for conducting and reporting narrative reviews, meta-analyses,
and meta-syntheses. Annual Review of Psychology 70 (1), 747–770.
URL https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010418-102803
Song, J., Lim, J. H., Yun, M. H., 2016. Finding the latent semantics of haptic inter-
action research: A systematic literature review of haptic interaction using content
analysis and network analysis. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing &
Service Industries 26 (5), 577–594.
URL https://doi.org/10.1002/hfm.20678
Swindells, C., Maksakov, E., MacLean, K., Chung, V., 2006. The role of prototyping
tools for haptic behavior design. In: Proceedings of the 14th Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems. pp. 161–168.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAPTIC.2006.1627084
Swindells, C., Pietarinen, S., Viitanen, A., 2014. Medium ﬁdelity rapid prototyping
of vibrotactile haptic, audio and video eﬀects. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Haptics
Symposium. HAPTICS ’14. pp. 515–521.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAPTICS.2014.6775509
Terenti, M., Vatavu, R.-D., 2022. Measuring the user experience of vibrotactile feed-
back on the ﬁnger, wrist, and forearm for touch input on large displays. In: Pro-
ceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended
Abstracts. CHI EA ’22. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519704
Turmo Vidal, L., Zhu, H., Waern, A., M´ arquez Segura, E., 2021. The design space
of wearables for sports and ﬁtness practices. In: Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’21. ACM, New York, NY,
USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445700
Vatavu, R.-D., Mossel, A., Sch¨ onauer, C., 2016. Digital vibrons: Understanding users’
perceptions of interacting with invisible, zero-weight matter. In: Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices
and Services. MobileHCI ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 217–226.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2935334.2935364
Vyas, P., Taha, F. A., Blum, J. R., Cooperstock, J. R., 2020. HapToes: vibrotactile
numeric information delivery via tactile toe display. In: Proceedings of the 2020
IEEE Haptics Symposium. HAPTICS ’20. pp. 61–67.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HAPTICS45997.2020.ras.HAP20.34.8ad689d4
Wang, D., Guo, Y., Liu, S., Zhang, Y., Xu, W., Xiao, J., 2019. Haptic display for virtual
reality: progress and challenges. Virtual Reality & Intelligent Hardware 1 (2), 136–
162.
URL https://doi.org/10.3724/SP.J.2096-5796.2019.0008
Wenig, D., Sch¨ oning, J., Olwal, A., Oben, M., Malaka, R., 2017. WatchThru: expand-
30
ing smartwatch displays with mid-air visuals and wrist-worn augmented reality. In:
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 716–721.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025852
Wobbrock, J. O., 2019. Situationally aware mobile devices for overcoming situational
impairments. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering In-
teractive Computing Systems. EICS ’19. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3319499.3330292
Yin, G., Otis, M. J.-D., Fortin, P. E., Cooperstock, J. R., Jun. 2019. Evaluating mul-
timodal feedback for assembly tasks in a virtual environment. Proceedings of the
ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3 (EICS).
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3331163
Youn, E., Lee, S., Kim, S., Shim, Y. A., Chan, L., Lee, G., 2021. WristDial: an eyes-free
integer-value input method by quantizing the wrist rotation. International Journal
of Human–Computer Interaction 37 (17), 1607–1624.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2021.1898848
31