A Desktop-sized Platform for Real-time Control
Applications of Pneumatic Soft Robots
Brandon J. Caasenbrood 1, Femke E. van Beek 1, Hoang Khanh Chu 1, and Irene A. Kuling 1
Abstract— In recent years, there have been many modeling
and control advances in the ﬁeld of soft robotics, which resulted
in a growing interest in practical, real-time applications. To
further enable these developments, we present a desktop-sized
testing and development platform intended for fast, precise, and
reliable (closed-loop) control of pneumatic soft robots. The Soft
Robotics Control-unit (SRC) is fully compatible with Matlab,
Simulink, and Unity, allowing for real-time control tasks of
various complexity. The system’s performance is tested in three
use-cases: model-based controller design, soft haptic feedback in
virtual-reality, and tele-operation of a soft gripper. To promote
the use of the SRC in the soft robotics community, all presented
material is fully open-sourced such that it is easily reproducible
by students or researchers from any technical background.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In the past decade(s), the diversity in soft robotic design
has been growing rapidly, ranging from the popular PneuNets
[1] and artiﬁcial soft muscles [2] to a vast collection of
bio-inspired systems [3]–[6]. Although soft robotic design
and actuation is rather diverse in nature, a majority of soft
robotic systems rely on ﬂuidics or pneumatics. Pneumatics
have the advantage of being readily available, yet, there
exists a stark contrast between the ease of soft robotic design
and the burden of developing a tailored pneumatic control
systems. In many cases, researchers are forced to develop
a custom control interface [3], [7]–[9], as commercially-
available solutions are limited. In particular, with the increas-
ing development in model-based controllers for soft robotics,
there exists an increasing demand in versatile platforms
that allow for complex control strategies that are nowadays
standardized in rigid robotics. Some examples include: mo-
tion control, impact and robust control, locomotion, tele-
operation, haptic feedback, and machine and reinforcement
learning. We believe that such control strategies for soft
robotics could advance faster if researchers would be able
to use a standardized development platform.
In addition to enabling faster development, the standard-
ization of control systems would allow for a better perfor-
mance description of new soft robotic designs. Currently,
descriptions of new soft robots often present numbers on for
instance response times [10]. However, these performance
values partially depend on the soft robotic design, the hard-
ware, and the software that is used to control the pneumatic
networks (e.g, PD [11], [12] and bang-bang control [13]–
[15]). As such, standardization of control hardware and
1B.J. Caasenbrood, F.E Beek, H. Khanh Chu, I.A. Kuling are
with the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Dynamics and Con-
trol Group, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB Eind-
hoven, The Netherlands. Email: b.j.caasenbrood@tue.nl, f.e.v.beek@tue.nl,
h.chu.khanh.hoang@student.tue.nl, and i.kuling@tue.nl
Fig. 1. Overview of the Soft Robotics Control-unit (SRC) connected to
a planar bending soft robot with two pressure inputs. Through a TCP/IP
server, the pneumatic control unit can communicate with a host-pc running
MATLAB/Simulink in real-time – thus allowing for fast (closed-loop)
control and simultaneous data acquisition.
software could make full system characterization more in-
formative. To aid in these aims, we present a fully integrated
solution for real-time control of pneumatic soft robotics
systems.
A. State-of-the-art
The development of pneumatic control architectures is
perhaps not new, and the aim of this work is not to compete
with existing system, but rather focus the branch of fast,
precise (closed-loop) control applications. A popular option
for pneumatic control, especially for newer researchers to
the ﬁeld of soft robotics, is the ’Soft Robotics Toolkit’ [11],
[12]. This platform has been a major way to democratize
soft robotics, including a vast catalogue of soft robotic
designs, models, and low-level controls. Other democratiza-
tion initiatives are the FlowIO development platform [14],
[15] and the Programmable-Air platform [16]. Although
these initiatives offer great prototyping capabilities, they
are limited in more advanced control settings where small
onset latencies, high ﬂow-rates, and computational ﬂexibility
are essential for real-time control applications. Booth et al.
have produced a very small, fast, and wearable-robot control
system [13]. Although their onset latencies do come close
to our requirements, and their solution is very elegant for
on-robot-wearable form factors, their ﬂow rates (0.1 L/s)
2022 IEEE 5th International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft)
April 4-8, 2022, Edinburgh, UK
978-1-6654-0828-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE 217
2022 IEEE 5th International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) | 978-1-6654-0828-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ROBOSOFT54090.2022.9762137
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
are perhaps not sufﬁcient for fast actuation of larger-sized
robots. Another platform, which is perhaps closely related to
the work presented here, is the work of Young et al. [8]. Yet
we focus instead on a system that primarily supports single-
board computers rather than micro-controllers, e.g., Arduino
Due, which might limit higher bandwidths, advanced on-
board computations, and data acquisition of multiple sensor
nodes. Another open-source system that allows real-time
control is the PneumaticBox [9], yet their system does not
support proportional pressure regulation.
Rather than focusing on small-scale and autonomous soft
robots in which compactness is key, we focus on a class
of soft robotic systems that are suitable in a classic indus-
trial setting, e.g., manipulation, pick-and-place, and general
motion control. We also envision use-cases for haptics and
tele-operation, which must satisfy tight delay constraints
and high-bandwidths. The haptic sense (i.e., sense of touch)
reliably detects latencies exceeding 50 ms between motor
actions and haptic feedback [17], and tele-operation systems
suffer from instabilities in the presence of delays [18].
Similar instability issues might occur in model-based control
strategies for soft robotics, where small delays can diminish
the intrinsic passivity of the systems. To our knowledge, a
system meeting these requirements does not exist yet, hence
we offer an open-source alternative to the existing state-of-
the-art systems.
B. Contribution
In this work, we present an open-source Soft Robotics
Control Unit (SRC) for pressure-driven soft robots, with
a particular focus on fast, precise, and accurate closed-
loop applications. Compared to previous hardware, our main
contributions include:
• Desktop-sized, modular control platform for real-time
control of pneumatic soft robots;
• Low-level controller suited for piezo-actuated pressure
valves – RMS errors ≤ 1 kPa and delay≤ 20 ms.
• High-frequency control loop with bandwidths up to 500
Hz (up to 12 individual pneumatic channels);
• Sensor support via standardized I 2C Qwiic connection
(up to individual 6 sensor channels) 1;
• Several options for fast and easy software interfacing
via MATLAB, Simulink, and Unity.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we give an
overview of the control platform, detailing the hardware,
software, and its compatibility for interfacing with other
software. Next, we discuss a low-level controller to improve
the system’s performance. Lastly, we show the performance
of the SRC in three soft robotic use cases with different
levels of control complexity.
II. P LATFORM OVERVIEW
Here we brieﬂy detail the hardware and software compo-
nents of the SRC. To support the soft robotics community,
1The Raspberry Pi 4 supports up to 6 unique I 2C busses. Each I 2C bus
can support multiple sensor; however, each sensor ICs must have a unique
I2C address on the same bus to avoid cross-talk.
Fig. 2. Images of the SRC’s custom real-time controller hat stacked on
a Raspberry Pi 3 (above) and on a Raspberry Pi Zero (below). The RPi
hat is compatible with the Raspberry Pi 3, 4, and Zero. It has two Qwiic
I2C ports for additional sensors, two ports for the Festo’s VEAB pressure
regulators, and an onboard 24 V buck-boost converter. For the RPi 4, up to
six VEAB controller hats can be stacked in a single system.
all material presented in this work (i.e., hardware, software,
documentation, and use cases) is made publicly available
at the following repository 2. We would like to stress that,
although some components are custom-made, our open-
source resources make it easy for researchers or students
from any technical background to reproduce the SRC.
A. Hardware overview
In the following section, we will detail the inner hardware
of the SRC control unit. The system consists of a single-
board computer (Raspberry Pi 4, 2GB RAM), a custom Rasp-
berry Pi Hat that interfaces between the computer and two
pressure regulators. There exist various options for pressure
regulation, but we opted for Festo’s three-way proportional
valve (VEAB-L-26-D7-Q4-V1-1R1) with an active range of
−0.1 < P(t) ≤ 0.1 MPa differential pressure and ﬂow
rate of 0.075≤ Q(t)≤ 0.33 L/s. The custom RPi hat can
support upto two VEAB regulators each, and is versatile to
ﬁt many board computer or micro-controller options. The
enclosure is fully 3D-printed, and can be fabricated using a
standard FDM printer.
The custom circuit board has a small footprint of 30 ×60
mm and can be stacked as a Raspberry Pi Hat. To in-
terface with the VEAB regulators, the circuit board has
two Digital-to-Analog converters (MicroChip, MCP4725)
and two Analog-to-Digital converters (Texas Instruments,
ADS1014) that send and receive data from the regulators,
respectively. Given the speciﬁcations of the DACs and ADCs,
the system has, under ideal conditions, a control and mea-
surement resolution of e = ±0.048 kPa. Both the ADCs
and DACs are paired with non-inverting opamps (Texas
Instruments, LM358S) such that the voltage-levels (in this
case 3.3V) are compatible with various board computers,
2github.com/chukhanhhoang/SoftRoboticSetupFesto
218
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 3. Schematic overview of the software architecture running on the Raspberry Pi 4, and its interfacing options. The software architecture consists of
three consecutive layers that build upon each other. All sensor and hardware I 2C communication occurs in the second layer; whereas the last layer acts
as an optional layer for changing conﬁguration parameters. Lastly, the python code starts a TCP/IP server to interface with Matlab/Simulink and Unity
externally.
e.g., any Raspberry Pi system or Nvidia Jetson Nano. The
on-board array of ADCs and DACs can be accessed via I 2C.
To enable a stackable design, we exploit the available six I2C
busses on the Raspberry Pi 4 – thus allowing for connecting
twelve regulators simultaneously. Furthermore, each board
is equipped with two I 2C Qwiic connectors that allow for
additional sensor communication at 400 kHz. Our open-
sourced PCB design ﬁles can be used to order the boards
from most PCB manufacturing facilities that allow for in-
house PCB fabrication and component placement.
B. Software architecture
The main software of the setup, written in Python, is
designed in three layers to optimize for speed, convenience,
and versatility. The setup can read multiple sensors and
control several VEAB regulators simultaneously, as well as
communicate with other devices via TCP/IP. An illustrative
diagram of the software architecture is given in Figure 3.
The ﬁrst layer of the software provides two base classes:
baseSoftRobot.py and baseSensor.py. The class baseSoft-
Robot.py sets up the multi-processing environment that han-
dles the TCP/IP communication for the array of VEAB
regulators and sensors. Multi-processing is used here to
process data in parallel, improving not only the speed of the
system but also the timing precision. The class baseSensor.py
serves as a wrapper for other sensor classes. Both classes act
as parents for other classes in the next layer(s).
The second layer facilitates all communication between
the Raspberry Pi and the SRC real-time controller hat. First,
necessary libraries are imported. Next, sensor classes are
written as children of the baseSensor.py class, and in each
sensor class, a function called ReadSensor must be imple-
mented when using sensors. Finally, the class SoftRobot, in-
heriting all functions of baseSoftRobot.py, is assembled from
all software parts relating to the TCP/IP communication,
regulators, and sensors. Thus, the class SoftRobot acts as
the main class of the software architecture that encompasses
the user’s requirement.
The third layer is dispensable and added for the con-
venience of users. This layer is a Python script that takes
the arguments and initializes a SoftRobot object accordingly.
Changing the parameters of the software (i.e., number of
sensors and actuators, sampling frequency, setting the TCP
port) is no longer an arduous task of re-writing the code.
C. MATLAB, Simulink, and Unity interfaces
One of the platform’s key features is its versatility in terms
of programming interface. First, in MATLAB, we developed
an Object-Oriented class SRC.m, which can be found on
the repository. The class allows for easy communication
with the hardware platform through an array of integrated
functions. Alternatively, the Simulink interface provides the
same functionality as the MATLAB interface, but it provides
GUI-based programming. The base sets up the TCP/IP
communication with the SRC, and additional functionalities
can be added using auxiliary Simulink blocks.
For control scenarios related to human-robot cooperation,
we explore the Unity game engine. Therefore, a Unity
package for TCP/IP communication is developed based on
the work of Weiland [19]. Important parameters are exposed
to Unity’s interface, so that they can be set by the user
without the need for changes in the source code.
We provide working examples of the three interface op-
tions (i.e., MATLAB, Simulink, and Unity) to further support
the use-cases presented in section III. However, let it be clear
that any interface that allows for TCP/IP communication is
compatible with minimal changes to the software.
D. Low-level controller design
To enhance the pneumatic performance of the SRC, we
extend beyond the standard PD- and bang-bang control
architecture as often presented literature [11]–[15]. As such,
we propose a novel low-level controller that ensures a low
tracking error and delay w.r.t. a dynamic reference. First,
the dynamics of the intrinsic VEAB pressure regulation
together with the pneumatic network of the soft robot can
be approximated using a ﬁrst-order dynamical system of the
form:
Σ :
{
˙x =Ax +φ(u),
p =x, (1)
219
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 4. Performance results of the control unit under dynamic testing
in which a feed-forward (FF) and feedback (FB) controller is employed
for accurate and fast pressure regulation. Here we observe a substantial
performance increase using the proposed control law given in (2)-(3).
where x denotes the internal pressure state of the pressure
regulator, u the control input, p the pressure output of the
system, and φ : R → R a nonlinear input map due to
the piezo-actuation of the VEAB regulator. To be more
speciﬁc, the (monotonic) mapping φ(u) describes the local
nonlinearity of the regulators for pressure signals close to
ambient pressure. This behavior (similar to a dead zone) is
important to include in the model, as it is the lead cause
of tracking errors when switch from positive to negative
differential pressures, or when considering high-frequent
ﬂuid ﬂows. The control objective here is to ensure that
the VEAB regulator closely follows the reference trajectory,
denoted here by pd. As such, we wish to ensure that the
tracking error goes to zero after sufﬁcient time passes, i.e.,
limt→∞p→pd. To achieve this, we propose a combination
of feed-forward (FF) and feedback (FB) control:
u = ˆφ−1(ν), (2)
ν =Fd ˙pd +pd−Kp(p−pd), (3)
whereKp is the proportional gain of the feedback controller,
Fd the differential gain of the feed-forward controller, and
ˆφ−1 the approximation of the inverse mapping to counteract
the deadzone 3 such that it satisﬁes φ◦ ˆφ−1 ≈ 1 (i.e.,
φ(ˆφ−1(x)) ≈ x which attempts to counteract the piezo
nonlinearity). Note that if the signal ˙pd is unavailable, one
can employ derivative ﬁltering scheme.
E. System performance measurements
To test the performance of the full system, we connect
the SRC to the PneuNet shown in Figure 5, and considered
a dynamic pressure trajectory pd = 20 + 40 sin( t). To
3The deadzone function φ : R→ R is assumed to be a monotonically
increasing function, such that its inverse exists.
Fig. 5. A few snapshots of the PneuNet when subjected to a regulated
sinusoidal pressure signal p(t). Left: (a) Placement of the inertial sensor
for real-time curvature sensing that are communicated via I 2C to the SRC.
Fig. 6. System identiﬁcation results of the PneuNet actuator using
experimental data – and the model-ﬁt of the hyper-elastic PCC model. The
system is subjected to a periodic sine input, we observe a hysteresis loop,
hyper-elasticity, and self-contact.
illustrate the effectiveness of the low-level controller, we
also compared the open and closed-loop performance. The
open-loop controller is equivalent to setting the input of
the controller to the reference signal, i.e., u = pd. The
performance results of the low-level controller are shown
in Figure 4, where the RMS error and maximum error
are±0.35 kPa and±1.91 kPa, respectively. All reported
pressures are relative to atmospheric pressure. In contrast,
the open-loop system has a RMS error and maximum error
of±3.98 kPa and±10.93 kPa, respectively. Regarding the
phase shift, we observe an estimated difference of ±160
ms and±45 ms in open-loop and closed-loop, respectively.
Given these results, we show that the low-level controller
reduces both the tracking error and delay substantially. Please
note that the system parameters of Σ are unique and depend
for instance on the tube length, volume, and the type of
regulator. For optimal performance, tuning of the gains might
be required for every soft robot.
III. U SE CASES FOR SOFT ROBOTICS
In this section, we highlight the performance of the SRC
in terms of precision and delay, and its versatility. To do
so, we explore three use cases: i) system identiﬁcation and
model-based control of a soft robot, ii) tele-operation using
a soft gripper, iii) and soft haptic feedback using Virtual
Reality (VR). To improve transparency, all the study-cases
are provided in the supplementary material of the paper,
and the software is made publicly available at the repository
under the folder ./src/examples.
220
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A. System identiﬁcation and model-based control of PneuNet
In the ﬁrst study case, we primarily focus on model-based
strategies for a bending soft robot seen in Figure 5. Our aim
here is two-fold: i) to employ system identiﬁcation to derive
a dynamic model, and ii) to utilize the dynamic model for
control. As such, fast and low-latency pressure regulation is
important. To measure the state of the system, an Inertial-
Measurement Unit (InvenSense, MPU9250) is attached to
the end-effector of the soft robot (see Figure 5). The sensor
is connected via I 2C to the SRC and the data acquisition
is programmed in the Python class SoftRobot.py (see
Section. II-B). Based on preliminary tests, we propose an
ansatz for the (nonlinear) dynamics using an in-extensible
planar Piece-wise Constant Curvature (PCC) model that
accounts for hyper-elastic stiffness and elastic self-contact.
It is worth mentioning that there exists a rich literature on
PCC models, and the reader is referred to [4], [20]–[22] for
more detail and to [23] for the numerical implementation.
Let us introduce the state q :=κ withκ the (constant strain)
curvature. Then, the dynamic model takes the form:
M(q)¨q +C(q, ˙q) ˙q +P (q, ˙q) +G(q) =Hp, (4)
where M(q) is the generalized inertia matrix, C(q, ˙q) the
Coriolis matrix, P (q, ˙q) =k(q)q +µ ˙q the hyper-elastic and
visco-elastic forces withk(q) a nonlinear stiffness andµ> 0
a damping coefﬁcient, G(q) the gravitational forces, H a
pressure map, and p the control input (i.e., pressure). To
model the hyper-elastic stiffness and self-contact, we propose
the following nonlinear state-dependent function:
k(q) =α1e−min(α2q,0) +α3 (q−qc)α4
· min(q, 0), (5)
where α1,α 2,α 3,α 4 are hyper-elastic stiffness coefﬁcients,
and qc the joint position when self-contact of the soft body
occurs. In the identiﬁcation procedure, we subject the soft
robot to a periodic pressure input p = 10 + 80 sin(2t) kPa.
The resulting dynamics converge to a periodic solution, on
which we ﬁt our dynamic model. The system identiﬁcation
results of the ansatz in (4)-(5) using the periodic experimental
data show a good match between the model and measure-
ment, as can be seen in Figure 6.
Now, using the aforementioned model, we propose a
model-based controller to control the soft robot’s state:
p =H−1
[
P (q, ˙q) +G(q)−Kpe−Ki
∫
e(τ)dτ
]
, (6)
where Kp,Ki are proportional and integrator gains, respec-
tively; and e := q− qd the tracking error between the
state and the desired trajectory. The model-based controller
is a combination of gravity-stiffness compensation together
with a PI-controller. The model-based controller above is
programmed using MATLAB/Simulink and communicates
via TCP/IP with the control unit (at 200 Hz). Considering a
described dynamic trajectory qd = 8+8 sin(2t), the tracking
performance of the model-based control law is shown in
Figure 7, where we observe good tracking performance with
a maximum steady-state error of e =±1.42 m−1. These
Fig. 7. Experimental results of the proposed model-based controller in
(6). We observe that the model-based controller can provided good tracking
performance – the steady-state error is δmax≤ 1.42 (m−1).
Fig. 8. Overview of the tele-operation system in use case 3. The angles of
the user’s thumb, index and middle ﬁnger are captured by the Leap Motion
camera, and mapped to pressures of the three-ﬁnger Pneunet gripper.
results demonstrate the SRC’s versatility as a platform for
the development and testing of model-based controllers.
B. Tele-operation of soft gripper
In the next use case, we focus on a tele-operation scenario
in which a user’s hand movements are mapped to a remote
three-ﬁngered soft PneuNet gripper (DragonSkin 10) as
shown in Figure 8. In this particular setting, minimizing
latency outweighs tracking performance here, as minimal
latency will improve human-robot transparency [24] and
allow for better system stability [18]. To track the user’s
hand, a Leap Motion tracker (Ultraleap) is used, positioned
on a stand above a desk. The joint angles of the user’s thumb,
index and ring ﬁnger are registered by Unity, and received
by MATLAB/Simulink using the TCP/IP communication
package.
To match the Leap Motion system, the refresh rate is set
to 120 Hz. To measure the effect of the additional communi-
cation layers consistently, a ramp is used as a representative
reference signal. The reference signal is communicated from
Unity through Simulink to the SRC, and the measured signal
221
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 9. Left: Performance for tele-operation in Unity. The top row shows
performance without (blue) and with our low-level controller (red). The
bottom row shows the difference (i.e. vertical error) between the reference
(gray) and measured signals (blue/red). In both ﬁgures, the 95% conﬁdence
interval is indicated with shaded regions, but the ten repetitions show such
comparable responses that it is hard to see the intervals. Right: Time
delays (i.e, horizontal error), indicating the horizontal distance between the
reference and measured pressures shown on the left. Time delays for the
low-level controller are much smaller than open-loop control delays.
is send then back to Unity and stored. The measurement is
repeated ten times, with and without the low-level controller
(FF+FB, see (2)-(3)). The controller is also tuned a-priori,
to better suit the use case. As illustrated in Figure 9, the
open-loop latency is considerably high (138±19 ms) for the
current setup. However, with the low-level controller, the
delay is substantially smaller (68 ±9 ms), albeit still above
the human perceptual limit. This illustrates that the proposed
system, under the appropriate control conditions, can be a
suitable candidate for exploring soft robotic tele-operation
in lab conditions.
C. Haptic feedback in Virtual Reality
In the next use case, we employ soft robotics to provide
haptic (i.e., touch) feedback to users in a virtual interface.
Adding haptic feedback to Virtual-Reality (VR) scenarios has
the potential to create better immersion and interaction with
virtual objects [25]. However, such beneﬁts only arise if the
feedback perceived is congruent with the other signals in the
scene. Therefore, the aim here is to test if the SRC can main-
tain fast feedback under the additional complexity of VR, and
to validate actuators with smaller volumes in retrospect to
previous use cases. We again use the Leap Motion tracker,
however, it is now attached to a VR headset (HTC, Vive
Pro VR) for hand tracking. For soft robotic haptic feedback,
small cylinders with a single air chamber are designed (11x7
mm) and composed of Dragonskin 10. Silicone ﬁnger sleeves
(Xutong) are used to attach the cylinders to the thumb, index
and middle ﬁnger of the user’s right hand, as shown in Figure
11. In the VR environment, users can interact with the virtual
interface, and haptic effects are generated based on ﬁnger
positions. The array of haptic effects are composed of ramps,
steps, and sine-wave primitives.
To match the sampling rate of the VR headset, a refresh
rate of 90 Hz is chosen. The same procedure as described in
the previous use case are used to test the haptic primitives,
in this use case ten times per controller setting. The results
in Figure 10 show that the VR use case operates below
perceptually noticeable delays (i.e., ≤50 ms). We do see
peaks in (vertical) errors, when the reference shows large
discontinuities due to tight control gains for minimal system
delay rather than small vertical errors. Nevertheless, these
peaks are small and short compared to the reference, thus
having little effect on the user experience. Together, these
results indicate that SRC is a viable option for haptic
feedback in a VR setting.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we present a desktop-sized testing and devel-
opment platform purposefully designed for real-time control
applications of pneumatic soft robots. Using a low-level
controller that compensates for the intrinsic nonlinear dy-
namics of the piezo-actuated regulators, we further enhance
the base performance of the closed-loop pneumatic system
– in both response time ( ≤50 ms) and tracking error ( ≤ 1
kPa). One key contribution of this work is the platform’s
versatility by allowing up to twelve regulated pressure ports
and an easy-to-program control interface that allows for
various soft robotic systems, sensors, and control use-cases.
To demonstrate its versatility and the system’s performance
in advanced control settings, the system is experimentally
corroborated using three different study-cases: model-based
control of a soft robot, soft haptics in VR, and remote tele-
operation of a soft gripper. In future work, we will also
develop custom sensor breakout boards and corresponding
programming tools, e.g., data acquisition for strain and
optical sensors, which further enrich the versatility of the
platform. These additional hardware systems and any further
development will be maintained on the open-repository in the
future.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Mosadegh, P. Polygerinos, C. Keplinger, S. Wennstedt, R. F. Shep-
herd, U. Gupta, J. Shim, K. Bertoldi, C. J. Walsh, and G. M. White-
sides, “Pneumatic networks for soft robotics that actuate rapidly,”
Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 24, no. 15, pp. 2163–2170, 2014.
[2] F. Schmitt, O. Piccin, L. Barb ´e, and B. Bayle, “Soft robots manufac-
turing: A review,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 5, 2018.
[3] A. D. Marchese, R. K. Katzschmann, and D. Rus, “A Recipe for Soft
Fluidic Elastomer Robots,” Soft Robotics, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 7–25, 2015.
[4] R. K. Katzschmann, C. D. Santina, Y . Toshimitsu, A. Bicchi, and
D. Rus, “Dynamic motion control of multi-segment soft robots using
piecewise constant curvature matched with an augmented rigid body
model,” RoboSoft 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Soft
Robotics, no. February, pp. 454–461, 2019.
[5] K. Nakajima, H. Hauser, T. Li, and R. Pfeifer, “Exploiting the
Dynamics of Soft Materials,” vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 339–347, 2018.
[6] V . Falkenhahn, T. Mahl, A. Hildebrandt, R. Neumann, and
O. Sawodny, “Dynamic Modeling of Bellows-Actuated Continuum
Robots Using the Euler-Lagrange Formalism,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1483–1496, 2015.
222
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 10. Left: performance of the Haptic VR Feedback use case primitives, as recorded in Unity. For the full caption, see Figure 9. The controller is
tuned to minimize delay, which results in larger overshoots compared to no control. For visibility, the tops of the peaks are cut off. Right: The time delays.
For all primitives, the low-level controller reduces the delays below the perceptual detection threshold.
Fig. 11. Bottom: User wearing a headset while exploring an interface in
use case 2: haptic feedback in VR. The interface provides visual, auditory,
and haptic feedback. Top: (a) The soft robotic tactile feedback units, which
provide (real-time) pressure feedback to the user’s ﬁnger tips. (b) The VR
interface, which provides congruent visual, auditory, and haptic feedback.
[7] P. Polygerinos, S. Lyne, Z. Wang, L. F. Nicolini, B. Mosadegh, G. M.
Whitesides, and C. J. Walsh, “Towards a soft pneumatic glove for
hand rehabilitation,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on , 2013, p. 1512–1517.
[8] T. R. Young, M. S. Xavier, Y . K. Yong, and A. J. Fleming, “A
control and drive system for pneumatic soft robots: Pneusord,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2021, pp. 2822–2829.
[9] “Robotics: The PneumaticBox control system for soft hand
control,” Mar 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.robotics.tu-
berlin.de/menue/softwaretutorials/pneumaticbox
[10] R. F. Shepherd, F. Ilievski, W. Choi, S. A. Morin, A. A. Stokes,
A. D. Mazzeo, X. Chen, M. Wang, and G. M. Whitesides, “Multigait
soft robot,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,
vol. 108, no. 51, pp. 20 400–20 403, 2011. [Online]. Available:
https://www.pnas.org/content/108/51/20400
[11] A. A. Zheng Wang, Panagiotis Polygerinos and A. Campo.
Fluidic control board. Last visited: 20-09-2021. [Online]. Available:
https://softroboticstoolkit.com/book/control-board
[12] D. P. Holland, C. Abah, M. Velasco Enriquez, M. Herman, G. J.
Bennett, E. A. Vela, and C. J. Walsh, “The soft robotics toolkit:
Strategies for overcoming obstacles to the wide dissemination of soft-
robotic hardware,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine, Special
Issue on Open Source and Widely Disseminated Robot Hardware ,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 57–64, 2017.
[13] J. W. Booth, J. C. Case, E. L. White, D. S. Shah, and R. Kramer-
Bottiglio, “An addressable pneumatic regulator for distributed control
of soft robots,” 2018 IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics,
RoboSoft 2018, no. April, pp. 25–30, 2018.
[14] A. Shtarbanov. Flowio platform. Last visited: 20-09-2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.softrobotics.io
[15] ——, “Flowio development platform – the pneumatic “raspberry pi”
for soft robotics,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems , no. 479. New York, NY ,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021.
[16] Programmable-air. Last visited: 20-09-2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.programmableair.com
[17] T. Kaaresoja, S. Brewster, and V . Lantz, “Towards the temporally
perfect virtual button: Touch-feedback simultaneity and perceived
quality in mobile touchscreen press interactions,” ACM Trans.
Appl. Percept. , vol. 11, no. 2, 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2611387
[18] T. Sheridan, “Space teleoperation through time delay: review and
prognosis,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation , vol. 9,
no. 5, pp. 592–606, 1993.
[19] T. Weiland. Tcp-udp networking. Last visited: 29-09-2021. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/tom-weiland/tcp-udp-networking
[20] B. J. Caasenbrood, A. Y . Pogromsky, and H. Nijmeijer, “Dynamic
modeling of hyper-elastic soft robots using spatial curves,” in IFAC-
PapersOnLine, vol. 53, 2020, pp. 9238–9243.
[21] A. D. Marchese and D. Rus, “Design, kinematics, and control of a
soft spatial ﬂuidic elastomer manipulator,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research , vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 840–869, 2016.
[22] C. Della Santina, R. K. Katzschmann, A. Bicchi, and D. Rus, “Model-
based dynamic feedback control of a planar soft robot: trajectory
tracking and interaction with the environment,” International Journal
of Robotics Research , vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 490–513, 2020.
[23] B. J. Caasenbrood, “Sorotoki - an open-source soft robotics toolkit for
matlab,” github.com/BJCaasenbrood/SorotokiCode, 2020.
[24] A. Toet, I. A. Kuling, B. N. Krom, and J. B. F. van Erp, “Toward
enhanced teleoperation through embodiment,” Frontiers in Robotics
and AI, vol. 7, 2020.
[25] B. Hannaford and A. M. Okamura, Haptics. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 719–739.
223
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:53:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 