Demonstrating HydroMod : Constructive Modules for
Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces
Takafumi Morita
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
morita@xlab.iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yu Kuwajima
Smart Materials lab., Shibaura
Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nb21105@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Ayato Minaminosono
Smart Materials lab., Shibaura
Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nb20108@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Shingo Maeda
Smart Materials lab., Shibaura
Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
maeshin@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Yasuaki Kakehi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
kakehi@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Figure 1: HydroMod. (A) HydroMod supports three types of main modules and four types of additional parts, (B) Snapping each
module together by magnets, (C) Actuated seesaw, (D) Silent pin-based color display, (E) Wearable mobile fluid interface.
ABSTRACT
In recent years, actuators that handle fluids such as gases and liquids
have been attracting attention for their applications in soft robots
and shape-changing interfaces. In the field of HCI, there have been
various inflatable prototyping tools that utilize air control, however,
very few tools for liquid control have been developed. In this study,
we propose HydroMod, novel constructive modules that can easily
generate liquid flow and programmatically control liquid flow, with
the aim of lowering the barrier to entry for prototyping with liquids.
HydroMod consists of palm-sized small modules, which can gener-
ate liquid flow with the electrohydrodynamics (EHD) phenomenon
by simply connecting the modules. Moreover, users can control
the flow path by simply recombining the modules. In this paper,
we demonstrate three applications that can be easily prototyped
with liquids by recombining HydroMod. These applications show-
case the characteristics of using liquids: weight manipulation, color
expression, and heating/cooling control.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and
tools.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9156-6/22/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519893
KEYWORDS
Programmable Materials, Toolkit, Prototyping, Fluid Interface, Wear-
ables, Electrohydrodynamics
ACM Reference Format:
Takafumi Morita, Yu Kuwajima, Ayato Minaminosono, Shingo Maeda, and Ya-
suaki Kakehi. 2022. Demonstrating HydroMod : Constructive Modules for
Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces. InCHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts),
April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519893
1 INTRODUCTION
Groups of components are increasingly being modularized, pack-
aged, and kitted to enable prototyping in electronics and robotics
for those without engineering expertise [2, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16]. Toolk-
its such as littleBits [3], which reduce the time required to connect
components and allow users to create electronic systems by simply
connecting modules, are also expected to have applications in wear-
ables [7] and soft materials [8]. In the field of HCI, there has been a
significant amount of research in recent years on programmable
matter, where the material itself has interactivity. Fluid systems,
particularly in gases and liquids, are attracting attention for various
applications. However, compared with fields such as electronics
and robotics, the development of platforms for prototypes in the
field of programmable materials that deal with fluid control is a
developing area.
Prototyping with materials such as gases and liquids is a chal-
lenge because the system that drives the fluid must be built from
scratch and requires specialized knowledge. Several toolkits for
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
handling gases have been released in recent years. Typical exam-
ples include The Soft Robotics Toolkit [ 6], Pneuduino [ 13] [11],
Programmable Air [1], and FlowIO [15]. However, there are still
very few toolkits for handling liquids. There are three major reasons
why liquids are difficult to handle. First, many large external devices
are required for the handling of liquids. Further, relatively large
devices such as pumps, tanks, and valves are required to generate a
liquid flow. Second, it is difficult to reconfigure the path design of
liquid flow. Once the liquid flow path is specified and designed, it
takes a considerable amount of time to reconfigure it again using
the same parts because the existing fluid system is not designed to
be frequently removed. Third, the fluid system is vulnerable. If any
part of the system is defective, the working fluid will leak, and the
system will not function properly.
In this study, we propose HydroMod, novel constructive modules
that can easily generate liquid flow and programmatically control
liquid flow, with the aim of lowering the barrier to entry for proto-
typing through the use of liquids. We utilize electrohydrodynamic
(EHD) pumps [5] [4], which use the EHD phenomenon as a pump
function to generate liquid flow. The EHD phenomenon occurs
when a high voltage is applied to a dielectric liquid. Utilizing the
EHD pump, no mechanical moving parts are required because the
flow is generated simply by placing an electrode in the liquid and
applying a voltage. Furthermore, we expect that the small size and
quietness of the EHD pump will address the problem of using a large
pump, which is the primary cause of the difficulty when handling a
fluid. Therefore, we adopted an EHD pump for the pump function
of HydroMod. The HydroMod is composed of palm-sized compact
modules: Pump modules that generate liquid flow, Actuate modules
that apply a high voltage to drive the Pump modules, and Wire
modules that connect the modules. Each module of the HydroMod
is designed to be easily connected by magnets. A fluid flow can
be generated by simply connecting these modules, and flow paths
can be freely designed by simply recombining the modules, which
eliminates the difficulty of reconfiguring the fluid system, which is
a challenge. Furthermore, because HydroMod is a plug-and-play
module, anyone can easily prototype fluid systems without the need
for specialized knowledge. In addition, because the fluid system is
built through the combination of modules, even if a defect occurs
somewhere, it can be fixed by simply changing a part of the module
without changing the entire system. Hence, HydroMod is resistant
to vulnerabilities in fluid systems.
In this paper, we demonstrate three applications that can be
easily prototyped with liquids by recombining HydroMod. These
applications showcase the characteristics of using liquids: weight
manipulation, color expression, and heating/cooling control.
2 HYDROMOD
2.1 System Overview
HydroMod was created based on the following requirements to
enable an easy prototyping with liquid.
• It is possible to design a fluid system that can be easily re-
configured by simply combining modules.
• It is an untethered module based on wireless communication,
which allows the synchronization of multiple pumps and a
distributed placement according to the shape of the target.
Figure 2: HydroMod supports three types of main modules
and four types of additional parts: (a) Actuate module, (b)
Pump module, (c) Wire module, (d) Battery, (e) Connector, (f)
Small tank, (g) Tube including soft and hard types.
Figure 3: Five step process to operate the fluids with Hydro-
Mod: (A) place the Pump module at arbitrary positions, (B)
connect the Actuate module to the Pump module with a mag-
netic connector, (C) attach tubes or small tanks as the flow
path, (D) inject Novec 7100 as a liquid in the fluid system, (E)
control the created fluid system with simple GUI software.
• The pump function can be miniaturized without the need
for large external devices, and fluid systems can be designed
including wearable and mobile applications.
As shown in Fig. 2, HydroMod supports three types of main
modules and four types of additional parts. The main modules
consist of (a) Actuate module that can control the high voltage
applied to drive the EHD pump of the Pump module, (b) Pump
module with an EHD pump that generates liquid flow as a pump
function, and (c) Wire module that acts as a conductor to electrically
connect the Pump module and Actuate module. Additional parts
consist of (d) batteries that drive the Actuate module, (e) connectors
that connect the flow paths, (f) small tanks that store the liquid, and
(g) tubes, including soft and hard types, serving as the flow path.
The batteries, connectors, and tubes are off-the-shelf components,
and the small tanks are prepared by simply crafting acrylic sheets
according to the size required.
Each of the modules comprising HydroMod has a built-in magnet
as a connector. It is easy to create flow paths and electrical circuits
by simply connecting the modules together with the magnets. By
reconfiguring the modules, flow paths can be freely designed to
take into account the flow direction, pressure, and flow rate. In
addition, each module is small enough to fit in the palm of the hand
Demonstrating HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
and has a wireless communication function, making it possible to
create a compact hydraulic system that can be carried around and
used while moving around, which has been difficult to achieve with
existing hydraulic systems.
HydroMod is simple and requires only five steps to operate the
fluid system, as shown in Fig. 3. First, the Pump Module, which
generates the liquid flow, is placed at an arbitrary position. Subse-
quently, the Actuate module is connected to the Pump module with
a magnetic connector. If the Pump module and Actuate module can-
not be connected next to each other owing to placement problems
during prototyping, the Wire module can be connected between
them to increase the flexibility of the module placement. Next, the
additional parts such as connectors, tanks or tubes are attached
to create a flow path as needed. The user then injects Novec 7100
as a liquid in the fluid system. Finally, a simple GUI software on a
smartphone is used to remotely control the created fluid system. In
this way, as the main feature of HydroMod, it allows the users to
freely design a fluid system through this simple operation.
2.2 Intuitive Liquid Function Design through
the Combination of HydroMod Modules
The main features of the proposed HydroMod are the modularity
and reconfigurability of the fluid system. All the devices that make
up conventional fluid systems are substituted with small modules,
which are easy to handle, and once the modules are connected,
they can be easily reconnected. This makes it possible to design
the flow path intuitively through trial and error without detailed
simulations.
Furthermore, HydroMod has a major feature that is not found in
existing fluid systems that handle liquids. In the past, the pressure
and flow rates in fluid systems were usually controlled by adjusting
the opening of the solenoid valves. However, with HydroMod, the
pressure and flow rate can be changed tangibly by reconfiguring the
Pump modules. Fig. 4 shows the changes in the fluid functions when
the Pump modules are combined in series and parallel. Connecting
the Pump modules in series increases the pressure of the fluid,
whereas connecting them in parallel increases the flow rate of the
fluid. Not only can HydroMod programmatically control the liquid
from a microcontroller, but it can also be used to design a fluid
system with a tangibly adjusted fluid output in hardware.
Figure 4: Designing liquid functions by combining pump
modules. (Left) If the Pump modules are connected in series,
the pressure increases, and (Right) if they are connected in
parallel, the flow rate increases.
2.3 Flow Control Method by Recombining
HydroMod
The flow direction in HydroMod can be controlled dynamically by
changing the position of the Actuate module, without changing the
entire fluid system and without introducing additional equipment.
Figure 5: Reconfigurable flow control by recombining Actu-
ate modules: (A) place the Actuate modules in the lower left,
only the fan on the left turns counterclockwise. (B) place
the Actuate modules in the upper left, only the fan on the
left turns clockwise. (C) place the Actuate modules in the
upper left and lower right, the fan on the left turns clockwise
and the fan on the right turns clockwise simultaneously. (D)
place the Actuate modules in the upper left and upper right,
the fan on the left turns clockwise and the fan on the right
turns counterclockwise simultaneously.
The four consecutive flow controls in Fig.5 are taken as examples
and are described in the following order. First, (A) if the two Actuate
modules are placed in the lower left, only the fan on the left turns
counterclockwise. Subsequently, (B) if the two Actuate modules are
placed in the upper left, only the fan on the left turns clockwise.
Next, (C) if the two Actuate modules are placed in the upper left
and two Actuate modules are placed in the lower right, the fan on
the left turns clockwise and the fan on the right turns clockwise
simultaneously. Finally, (D) if the two Actuate modules are placed
in the upper left and two Actuate modules are placed in the upper
right, the fan on the left turns clockwise and the fan on the right
turns counterclockwise simultaneously. In this way, fluid systems
using HydroMod can dynamically and tangibly control the fluid
flow in ways that are not possible with conventional fluid systems.
This control method does not require rebuilding the fluid system
to change the fluid flow, but can be controlled simply by attaching
the Actuate module, and thus there is no need to introduce new
equipment.
3 DEMO APPLICATIONS
3.1 Actuated Seesaw
Fig. 6 shows a seesaw object created by combining the modules of
HydroMod. By moving the liquid inside the hard tube and tank, the
position of the center of gravity is changed, and this application
functions as an actuator with kinetic movement. By alternately
driving two Actuate modules with different voltage application
directions, the liquid moves left and right inside the tube and tank,
and the tilt of the seesaw changes as the center of gravity shifts.
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
In addition, the timing and strength of the pump drive can be con-
trolled remotely through wireless communication, and it is possible
to implement with less wiring that does not interfere with the move-
ment of the seesaw. This application is based on the application of
weight manipulation, which is one of the properties of liquids.
Figure 6: Actuated seesaw. (A) HydroMod allows intuitive
design of a fluid system by simply combining modules. (B) It
creates a fluid flow and sends it to the face of the seesaw. (C)
Kinetic movements are created by moving the liquid inside
the tube and tank, and changing the position of the center
of gravity.
3.2 Silent Pin-based Color Display
Fig. 7 shows a silent pin-based color display created by combining
HydroMod. This pin-based display can silently show a liquid rep-
resentation synchronized at each drive location, such as a wave
representation. The colored water is controlled by utilizing the
separation characteristics of the liquid. Novec 7100, which is used
as a dielectric liquid, has a high density and is hydrophobic, so it
separates from water. When colored water is placed on Novec 7100,
Novec 7100 can push the colored water upward, so the colored
water can be controlled variably, and it is expressed as a display.
This application is based on the application of color expression,
which is one of the properties of liquids.
Figure 7: Silent pin-based color display. (A) The liquid in
the vertical pin is controlled in an upward and downward
direction. (B) By having multiple modules working in syn-
chronization, synchronized liquid expression can be achieved
at each driving location. (C) The colored water is controlled
by utilizing the separation characteristics of the liquid.
3.3 Wearable Mobile Fluid Interface
Fig. 8 shows a wearable mobile fluid interface created by combining
HydroMod. This is a wearable interface that can control cooling
by liquid, and can be used for mobile applications, such as moving
around or going outside. HydroMod is composed of a combination
of palm-sized modules that allows for the portable use of fluid
systems, which has been difficult with conventional fluid systems.
This application is based on the application of heating/cooling
control, which is one of the properties of liquids.
4 CONCLUSION
In this demonstration, with the aim of lowering the barrier to entry
for prototyping with liquids, we proposed HydroMod, novel con-
structive modules that can easily generate and programmatically
control liquid flow. HydroMod consists of palm-sized modules, and
the flow path can be freely designed by simply recombining the
Figure 8: Wearable mobile fluid interface. (A) A wearable
fluid device that can control cooling without external large
devices. (B) The pressure can be increased by connecting the
Pump modules in series. (C) Cooling the body with wearable
mobile fluid interface.
modules. Therefore, HydroMod overcomes the three factors that
have made it difficult to handle liquids in the past: the need for
large external devices, the difficulty in reconfiguring the flow path
design, and the fragility of the fluid system. We presented three
applications that can be easily prototyped with liquids by recom-
bining HydroMod. These applications showcase the characteristics
of using liquids such as weight manipulation, color expression, and
heating/cooling control. We believe that HydroMod will inspire
users to explore new types of fluid systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H04
882, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] Programmable Air. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://www.
programmableair.com/.
[2] Arduino. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from www.arduino.cc./.
[3] Ayah Bdeir and Ted Ullrich. 2010. Electronics as Material: LittleBits. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Funchal, Portugal) (TEI ’11). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 341–344. https://doi.org/10.1145/1935701.1935781
[4] Vito Cacucciolo, Hiroyuki Nabae, Koichi Suzumori, and Herbert Shea. 2020.
Electrically-Driven Soft Fluidic Actuators Combining Stretchable Pumps With
Thin McKibben Muscles. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 6 (2020), 146. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00146
[5] Vito Cacucciolo, Jun Shintake, Yu Kuwajima, Shingo Maeda, Dario Floreano, and
Herbert Shea. 2019. Stretchable pumps for soft machines. Nature 572, 7770 (2019),
516–519. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1479-6
[6] Donal Holland, Colette Abah, Marielena Velasco Enriquez, Maxwell Herman,
Gareth Bennett, Emir Vela, and Conor Walsh. 2017. The Soft Robotics Toolkit:
Strategies for Overcoming Obstacles to the Wide Dissemination of Soft-Robotic
Hardware. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine PP (02 2017), 1–1. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2016.2639067
[7] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Jason McPeak, Alexander Jiao, Liang He, Thomas Outing,
and Jon E. Froehlich. 2017. MakerWear: A Tangible Approach to Interactive Wear-
able Creation for Children . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 133–145. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025887
[8] Mannu Lambrichts, Jose Maria Tijerina, and Raf Ramakers. 2020. SoftMod: A Soft
Modular Plug-and-Play Kit for Prototyping Electronic Systems. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Sydney NSW, Australia) (TEI ’20). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 287–298. https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374950
[9] MESH. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://meshprj.com/en/.
[10] Lego Mindstorms. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://www.lego.com/
en-us/themes/mindstorms/.
[11] Jifei Ou, Felix Heibeck, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. TEI 2016 Studio: Inflated Curiosity.
In Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (TEI ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 766–769. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2839462.2854119
[12] Raspberry Pi. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from www.raspberrypi.org./.
[13] Pneuduino. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://pneuduino.org/.
[14] Scratch. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://scratch.mit.edu.
[15] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry
Pi” for Soft Robotics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[16] Toio. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://toio.io/.