52nd International Conference on Environmental Systems ICES-2023-157 
16-20 July 2023, Calgary, Canada 
 
Design, Development, and Testing of  
Peristaltic Suit: Active Compression and Physiological 
Sensing Intra-vehicular Activity Spacesuit for 
Cardiovascular Deconditioning 
Irmandy Wicaksono1*, Ali Shtarbanov2, Esha V. Ranade3, Rebecca Y. Slater4,  
Dava Newman5 and Joseph A. Paradiso6 
MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA 02142, United States 
Prolonged exposure to microgravity is known to cause various acute health risks, including 
muscle atrophy, bone loss, cardiovascular deconditioning, and orthostatic intolerance. Due to 
the absence of gravitational force, bodily fluid hydrostatic pressure gradients vanish, and 
blood distribution shifts from the astronaut's legs toward their upper body. Con sequently, it 
is imperative to provide continuous medical check -ups and interventions for astronauts and 
crewmembers throughout their long -term journey in outer space and also after their return 
to Earth. This paper presents the design, development, and pr eliminary parabolic flight 
testing of Peristaltic (PS) Suit. PS -Suit is an active bioelectronic intra -vehicular activity 
spacesuit that could simultaneously perform wireless multi -modal monitoring of vital signs , 
including heart  electrical activity, respiration, blood flow, and oxygen level and exert 
controlled, spatiotemporal and peristaltic pressure  through five textile -based compression 
sensors and five pneumatic chambers integrated across the bodysuit. Integrating physiological 
and physical sensing and pneumatic actuation systems in the PS-Suit (1) facilitates closed-loop 
and timely intervention for astronauts to regulate their cardiovascular dynamics and (2) 
enables researchers to study the direct influence of active -dynamic compression in micro to 
hypergravity conditions on various cardiovascular and physiological markers.  In the end, we 
tested and evaluated a functional prototype of the PS-Suit during a parabolic flight campaign 
to investigate the response of heart -rate and blood pulse arrival time to applied gradient 
compression and changes in gravitational force. 
Nomenclature 
 
ADC = analog-digital converter 
AGS = anti-gravity suit 
BCG = ballistocardiography 
BLE = Bluetooth low energy 
BP = blood pressure 
BPM = beat per minute 
DBP = diastolic blood pressure 
ECG = electrocardiography 
EVA = extravehicular activity 
GCG = gradient compression garment 
GLCS =  gravity loading countermeasure skinsuit 
                                                           
1 Ph.D. Candidate/Research Assistant, MIT Media Lab, *irmandy@mit.edu. 
2 Ph.D. Candidate/Research Assistant, MIT Media Lab. 
3 Undergraduate Researcher, MIT Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. 
4 Undergraduate Researcher, MIT Mechanical Engineering. 
5 Director, MIT Media Lab. Apollo Professor of Astronautics, Harvard + MIT Health, Sciences, and Technology.  
6 Alexander W. Dreyfoos (1954) Professor of Media Arts and Sciences, MIT Media Lab.  
GUI = graphical user interface 
HR = heart rate 
I2C = inter-integrated circuit  
I/O = input/output 
IMU = inertial measurement unit 
IR = infrared 
ISS =  international space station 
IVA = intravehicular activity 
LBNP = low body negative pressure 
LEO =  low earth orbit 
M = mean (average) 
 
2 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
OI = orthostatic intolerance 
PAT =  pulse arrival time 
PPG = photoplethysmography 
PTT = pulse transit time 
PWM = pulse-width modulation 
PWV = pulse wave velocity 
RR = respiration rate 
SBP =  systolic blood pressure 
SMA = shape memory alloy 
SMP = shape memory polymer 
SPI = serial peripheral interface 
SD =  standard deviation 
TPU = thermoplastic polyurethane
I. Introduction 
he vastness and mystery of space captivate a whole new frontier for exploration and discovery, offering potential 
answers to the fundamental questions about the origins of the universe and the limits of human potential. M ore 
than six decades have passed since Yuri Gagarin was aboard the Vostok 1 and made history as the first human to 
travel into space. Extended spaceflight missions, where astronauts live and work at the International Space Station 
(ISS), have since become a routine, lasting anywhere from three months to a year1,2. The ISS serves as a crucial testing 
ground for the development of technologies and systems necessary for future space exploration missions.  It provides 
a well-resourced infrastructure where scientists and astronauts can conduct research and experiments on the effects of 
space environments to human physiology and psychology.  It is important to note that the space environment is highly 
extreme and hostile to the human body, as it is characterized by a range of conditions, inc luding an intense solar 
ultraviolet field, high vacuum, high-velocity micrometeoroid impacts, atomic oxygen erosion, high temperatures, and 
microgravity3. Extra-vehicular activity (EVA) pressurized spacesuits integrated with a life support system can help 
astronauts to survive the harsh space environment . EVA spacesuits have supported astronauts through spacewalks 
outside the ISS and explorations in low-earth orbit (LEO) and on lunar missions4. While the ISS is designed to protect 
astronauts from extreme space environments, it cannot shield them from the effects of microgravity, which can have 
significant impacts to their physiology.  
On Earth, humans typically spend about two -thirds of the day upright and about the rest lying down during 
sleep at night. Upon reaching weightlessness, our body tissues and fluids in the vascular and lymphatic 
systems are relieved as they become immediatel y unloaded from their established compressive forces in 
Earth's gravity. The e arly crewed space program Gemini (1965) concluded that prolonged microgravity 
exposure induces various acute health risks, including reduced red cell mass, osteoporosis, skeletal  muscle 
atrophy and fatigue, cardiovascular deconditioning, and orthostatic intolerance 5. Space programs such as Apollo 
(1968) and Skylab (1973) 6,7 had also supported  long-term research data to further study human physiological 
adaptations in space and the effectiveness of lower-body negative pressure (LBNP) as a countermeasure technology. 
Recent research conducted by Marshall -Goebel et al. (2019), through a study that measured the internal jugulat vein 
of 11 healthy astronauts, found that prolonged exposure to microgravity results in a chronic reverse head -ward blood 
and tissue shift, which could lead to complications such as the formation of blood clots and thrombosis 8. Th ese 
findings underline the importance of continuous medical monitoring and intervention for astronauts in long-term 
microgravity exposure and after their return to Earth. In the context of longer missions, such as a one-way trip to Mars 
which takes approximately 1.5 years, the significance of ensuring cardiovascular health will become even more 
critical.  
Gravity has a significant influence on bodily fluid hydrostatic pressure gradients. Without it, blood distribution 
tends to move up towards the upper body. As a countermeasure, astronauts have traditionally used LBNP chambers, 
orthostatic intolerance (OI) anti-gravity suits (AGS), and gradient compression garments (GCG), which are designed 
to improve blood circulation  and musculoskeletal health, amongst other benefits 9. However, large countermeasure 
equipment may not be practical for future spaceflight, owing to its payload and vehicle space requirements 10,11. On 
the other hand, a wearable solution such as the GCG cannot adapt to the physical change of the body and maintain 
constant pressure throughout 12–14. The tightness of these  compression suits also make them hard to put on and off . 
AGS requires connection to a bulky pneumatic system, which restrict s astronauts' mobility15. In addition, both GCG 
and AGS technologies are not responsive and do not dynamically adapt to the physiological changes of the astronauts.  
To this end, inspired by the contraction and relaxation of muscles in the human gastrointestinal tract, we have 
developed Peristaltic Suit (PS -Suit) by embedding an array of soft, te xtile-based actuators and physical and 
physiological sensors into a full -body intra -vehicular activity (IVA) suit with miniaturized and wireless sensing -
actuation physiological and pneumatic control hardware16. Incorporating both sensing and actuation systems enable 
us to observe the direct influence of active compression on various physiological marker s17. In summary,  our main 
contributions, which will be covered in this paper, are as follows: 
T 
 
3 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
1) Description of material and methods of inflatable fabrics for an active compression system  in sleeve 
prototypes 
2) Design framework and the development process of the full-body PS-Suit  
3) Implementation of various firmware and hardware elements of PS-Suit, including the physiological and 
physical sensing system, as well as the pneumatic actuation system 
4) Skin compression characterization of the active compression system 
5) Testing the PS-Suit prototype in a parabolic flight to evaluate micro -to-hyper-gravity and gradient 
compression effects on physiological markers, such as pulse-arrival time (PAT) and heart-rate (HR). 
II. Background and Related Work 
A. Cardiovascular Performance and Monitoring in Space Physiology 
The cardiovascular system regulates blood cells, oxygen, nutrients, and waste products ar ound the body, as the 
blood - its main component - circulates through a closed network of vessels. Blood distribution is heavily influenced 
by gravity. In an upright position, blood pressure is greater in the feet, which is around 26.7 kPa (200 mmHg) than in 
the head (~9.3 kPa, 70mmHg), and it is also greater relative to the heart ( ~13.32 kPa, 100mmHg)18. This gradient is 
lost in space, causing astronauts to suffer from face puffiness and motion sickness within a few minutes of 
microgravity exposure 19. Another primary concern impacting astronaut health and safety is lan ding day orthostatic 
intolerance. Astronauts with orthostatic intolerance cannot maintain adequate arterial blood pressure and have 
decreased brain blood levels when upright. Research has found that up to 80% of astronauts experience this condition 
within four to six hours of landing from long-duration spaceflight20. To prevent and reduce the likelihood of orthostatic 
intolerance, monitoring astronauts' health and performance and providing countermeasures during and after space 
missions is essential. 
Several studies have been conducted to evaluate cardiovascular parameters such as heart rate and blood pressure 
variability during short microgravity periods in parabolic flights to long-term microgravity in LEO. Aerts et al. (2015) 
concluded that there is a direct relationship between gravity levels to mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure with 
reduction of blood pressure (BP) responding to lower gravity based on their six participants parabolic flight test with 
electrocardiogram (ECG), inflatable finger cuff, and photoplethysmogram (PPG) 21. A study by McCall et al. (2015) 
also conducted a parabolic flight test to study cardiovascular performance in nine participants by using non -invasive 
measurement of pulse -transit time (PTT), which inversely correlates to systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood 
pressure based on ballistocardiograpm (BCG) and PPG signals22. They concluded that mean PTT between ground and 
microgravity for all subjects increased by around 30%. Pulse -arrival time (PAT) between ECG and PPG of the foot  
has also been used as a non-invasive blood pressure correlation parameter during postural transitions before and after 
spaceflight, with the results showing cardiovascular deconditioning with heart -rate (HR) increasing by an average of 
10/min and SBP/DBP by 0.67/1 kPa  (5/8 mmHg ) in supine posture after spaceflight 23. Baevsky et al.  (2007) 
conducted a long-term 6-months study, with the addition of one and two months pre-flight and three and six days post-
flight on BP adaptation in eight ISS astronauts with an oscillometric monitoring device. The results show that diastolic 
blood pressure was significantly reduced by 1.33 kPa ( 10 mmHg) and was stable from beginning to end during the 
spaceflight, with heart-rate variability unchanged. Three days after spaceflight, both SBP/DBP jumped in average by 
around 2.67 kPa (20 mmHg), which corresponds to a demand and adaptation in cardiac output24.  
One of the  major limitations of health monitoring in space is that crewmembers  are usually tethered to medical 
equipment, which sometimes can be inefficient and uncomfortable. At the ISS, crewmembers record their vital signs 
by manually connecting several devices, such as ECG, BP cuff, and vascular sonogram during their daily check-up or 
exercise routine25. With future lunar and Martian missions , it will become increasingly critical for crewmembers to 
have the capability to monitor and interpret their own health and performance  autonomously, so that they can focus 
on their mission and perform their tasks safely and effectively. Astronauts will  require non -invasive and remote 
diagnostic systems with decision -support features based on their real-time physiological data. In this light, wearable 
technologies, electronic textiles, and smart clothing developed for personal health, physical activity, and safety 
applications on the Earth can be adapted for space applications 26–31. Astroskin, a smart shirt initially launched with 
SpaceX CRS -16 in 2018 , for example,  can measure multitude physiological parameters such as blood pressure, 
electrophysiology, breathing rate, temperature and blood oxygen level 32,33. The co ntinuous advances of these 
technologies have shown the potential in developing and integrating new sensing modalities and actuation systems 
for personalized telemedicine and seamless medical intervention in outer space 34–36. 
 
4 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
B. Countermeasure Technologies and Compression Suits 
In the last decades, new solutions to mitigate the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal effects of microgravity have 
been implemented in the ISS. Crewmembers are required to exercise  for at least two hours per day using equipment 
such as   bicycle ergometer,  treadmill, bungee cord, an elastomer providing a resistance exercise,  and the 
Advanced/Interim Resistive Exercise Devices 10,37. Another solution is to simulate gravity itself. The best way to 
achieve this is to exploit the centripetal force produced by a centrifuge. However, building a centrifuge on a sufficient 
scale is challenging for space missions with constrained budgets and space 9. 
As shown in Figure 1, several wearable countermeasures have been designed and tested for spaceflight, including 
the Chibis suit,  Pingvin suit, the Skylab Cardiovascular Counter Pressure Garment , the Shuttle  AGS, the Kentavr, 
and the more recent GCG and the gravity-loading countermeasure skinsuit (GLCS). The lower body negative pressure 
(LBNP) chamber or commonly known as Chibis suit (Figure 1a) provides an effective cardiovascular countermeasure 
by pulling fluid down to the legs  in a vacuum chamber and  expanding veins and tissues of the lower body 7. This 
system immobilizes astronauts as they need to submerge their body hip down into a chamber. The Pingvin suit (Figure 
1b) uses bungee cords to provide longitudinal compression and resistance against normal posture to encourage muscle 
activation13. It has elastic bands connected to a waistband that create tension between the waist and the feet and 
between the shoulders and the waist with reported 50% of bodyweight loading. The design, however, only allows two 
discrete loading levels, making it uncomfortable and thermally unviable if worn for the recommended 8 hours, often 
hindering activity and exercise performance 9.The GLCS (Figure 1g) employed a bi-directional elastic weave and is 
customized to the wearer for com fort and a higher and more distributed loading resolution 14,38. Both the Pingvin suit 
and GLCS are geared toward reducing effects such as bone deterioration, muscle atrophy, and spinal elongation . 
For orthostatic intolerance and cardiovascular deconditioning wearable countermeasures, t he Skylab 
Cardiovascular Counter Pressure Garment  (Figure 1c) employed inflatable tubes that can be pressurized manually 
through a single bulb39. The mechanism was applied in partial pressure suits for pilots and jet fighters for many years 
prior to the development of fully pressurized suits. Upon inflation, the tubes expand and tighten the circumference of 
the leg, applying pressure mechanically. The garment was patterned such that the applied pressure was greatest at the 
ankles, and progressively less pressure was applied to the top of the thigh . The Shuttle AGS  (Figure 1d) , a more 
advanced example, is a pneumatic partial pressure system comprising five interconnected pressure bladders that covers 
the lower abdomen to the ank le15. Adapted from its use for military and jet pilots in the 80s, the AGS is an active 
garment that can be controlled through a pneumatic system and inflated to give pressure in the range of 3.59 to 17.2 
kPa (26.9 to 129.3 mmHg). The primary disadvantage of AGS is that it requires the wearer to be stationary. It is not 
optimized for wearability and mobility, as the air pipe is wired to a bulky pneumatic system. The  pressure in the 
inflatables used as an actuator also does not represent the actual pressure exerted on the body, making it less effective 
as a compression suit.  
The Kentavr (Figure 1e) and the recent GCG  (Figure 1f), on the other hand, are made of a  passive elastic fabric 
with the form-factor of a pant and a suspender overall, respectively. The Kentavr is adjusted using lacing panels on 
each component, allowing for a customizable fit to each subject and providing approximately 4 kPa ( 30 mmHg) of 
compression15,40.  The GCG is tailored to the individual from the lower abdomen to the foot and is designed to produce 
a fixed gradient compression force of 2.1 kPa (16 mmHg) in the abdominal region to 7.33 kPa (55 mmHg) around the 
 
 
Fig.1: Various IVA wearable counte rmeasure technologies , including a) Chibis Suit 45, b) Pingvin suit 46, c) 
Skylab Cardiovascular Counter Pressure Garment 39, d) Shuttle Anti -gravity Suit 47, e) the Kentavr48, f) 
Gradient Compression Garment40, and g) Mk-7 Gravity-Loading Countermeasure Skinsuit38. 

 
5 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
ankle41. However, compression garments are difficult to don/doff and are not able to exert dynamic or controllable 
pressure on the body.  They also do not adapt to the ph ysiological and physical changes of the astronauts. Several 
efforts have explored smart materials such as shape memory alloy (SMA) to develop morphing or dynamic 
compression garments, with BioSuit, a skintight mechanical counterpressure spacesuit that could substitute for modern 
gas-pressurized suits, as an example42–44. SMA integration and application into spacesuits are still under research, as 
they are relatively stiff for IVA garment s and spacewear and require high current or temperature actuation . 
Consequently, there is a need for a smart compression garment that offers dynamic and spatiotemporal controls based 
on the physical and physiological changes of the astronauts. This smart garment must  also incorporate wearable and 
lightweight systems designed for IVA during long-term space travel. 
III. Active Compression System Design and Development 
A. Materials and Methods 
Pneumatic compression devices have been widely used for aiding the circulation of blood and lympathic fluid in 
sports, rehabilitation, and medical settings. Pneumatic controls and inflatable pouches were leveraged for the actuation 
hardware (Section IV), as they afford the system requirements.  To develop active compression components based on 
soft textile-based pneumatic actuators, thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) film, as typically implemented in hot -melt 
adhesives (e.g., HM65, Perfectex), were used. An inflatable bladder was fabricated by thermally -welding two layers 
of TPU film with an impulse sealer (FS400, Fuxury). A hole was then punctured for the pneumatic tubing opening 
(1.5mm, uxcell) and sealed with soft silicone rubber glue (RTV 732, Dow Co rning). A two-terminal textile pressure 
sensor for quantifying the compression force was developed by sandwiching a piezoresistive knit fabric (LTT-SLPA-
60k, Eeonyx) in between two conductive knit fabrics (Stretch Conductive Fabric, Less EMF) and connectin g TPU-
insulated conductive threads (117/17 dtex silver -coated nylon, Statex). The textile pressure sensor leverages the 
piezoresistive effect, in which a force exerted onto a functional fabric compresses its percolated conducting structure, 
forming more electrical network, and thus, reduces its resistance 49,50. 
 
 
Fig.2: a) Exploded view and illustration of an active compression sleeve prototype, b) Internal textile pressure-
sensing array layer and c) final prototype of a calf sleeve integrated with air tubing. d) Demonstration of a 
peristalsis dynamic compression movement from ankle to knee. E) Arm sleeve prototype actuated sequentially 
and simultaneously with real-time compression pressure sensing. 

 
6 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
B. Implementation 
Figure 2a illustrates a design of an active compression sleeve with an array of five fabric bladders. An outer woven 
fabric and an inner 4 -way stretch fabric are patterned with openings in which to embed the inflatable pouches. The 
mechanical properties of these fabrics restrict and provide positive compress ion force toward the limb as the inner 
bladders are inflated. Free-standing TPU bladders were integrated inside a textile sleeve, instead of fused onto a textile 
with a heat press machine.  This technique made it easy to replace the bladder in the case of a damage or puncture. A 
two-terminal textile pressure sensor  (with a shared ground)  for quantifying the compression force is developed by 
sandwiching a piezoresistive knit fabric (LTT -SLPA-60k, Eeonyx) in between two conductive knit fabrics (Stretch 
Conductive Fabric, Less EMF) with an active force -sensitive area of 3 x 3 cm and connecting TPU -insulated 
conductive threads (117/17 dtex silver-coated nylon, Statex).  
Active compression calf (Figure 2b-c) and arm (Figure 2e) sleeves were developed by embedding five inflatable 
pouches into a customized textile structure and connecting it to FlowIO, our miniaturized pneumatic system 51. As 
shown in Figure 2d, controlled compression  and sequential inflation on each chamber can be applied  to mimic the 
peristaltic movement. Figure 1e shows the compression pressure data of each chamber as the active compression arm 
sleeve is inflated and deflated sequentially or simultaneously. A force exerted on each fabric pressure sensor re duces 
its resistance, which is shown as a drop in the analog-digital converter (ADC) value.  
IV. The Peristaltic Suit System 
When it comes to garments worn during various activities, ergonomic comfort is crucial, particularly for 
activewear and protective clothing like spacesuits. The mechanical characteristics of spacewear should align with the 
degree of freedom, range of motion, force, and moment of human joints. The garment's shape and fit relative to the 
human body and the pressure it exerts on the body significantly affect its ergonomic properties. Therefore, the design 
of compression spacesuits m ust balance the application of sufficient body surface pressure while enabling free 
movement, necessitating a comprehensive understanding of the biomechanics of human tissue and the cardiovascular 
system. Figure 3 shows illustrations of a human body stiffness map based on muscular and bone tissue distribution 52, 
a blood distribution map due to microgravity exposure 53, and a mobility map based on body joints 54 that inform our 
IVA spacesuit design.  
 
 
Fig.3: Qualitative mapping of the human body a) average tissue modulus,  b) blood flow distribution during 
initial and prolonged microgravity exposure, and c) active and passive mobility areas.  
A. Suit Design 
From blood flow mapping, it is known that microgravity exposure in space leads to the redistribution of fluids in 
the body, causing a shift of fluids toward the upper body and away from the lower limbs. This shift can lead to a 
decrease in blood volume and cardiac output, which, over time, can lead to cardiovascular deconditioning. In addition, 
orthostatic intolerance refers to the body's inability to  remain upright and maintain normal blood pressure and blood 
flow to the brain and  throughout the body . To address these conditions, spatiotemporal  gradient compression that 
could help regulate blood flow and pressure, and function similarly to GCG and Chibis suits, should be integrated into 
a full-body spacesuit7,40. In this case, IVA spacesuit design was considered, since astronauts spend most of their time 
conducting scientific experiments and performing essential daily tasks inside a space station.  

 
7 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
The morphology and heterogen eous tissue properties of the human body influence the evenness of skin pressure 
exerted by a compression suit 52,55. If the compression is not applied correctly, it can cause discomfort, restrict 
movement, and even lead to injury.  The anterior tibia region, for example, absorbs and dissipates compression less 
than the posterior elastic muscular region, since it has a higher stiffness due to the bone tissue density. Therefore, the 
compression suit must be personalized to the wearer's body . The  pneumatic, inflatable chambers should also be 
effectively distributed around the soft muscle regions to maximize pressure delivery throughout the body and regulate 
blood flow, while avoiding areas where they disrupt mobility, such as the body joints 53,54. The conformability of the 
suit is also important to achieve robust sensor-skin contact for long-term continuous physiological sensing26. 
To acquire precise measurements of the wearer, a Lenscloud 3D photogrammetry system comprising 120 cameras 
was operated to produce 360 ° scans of body contours  (Figure 4a). The images, stored in RealityCapture,  are then 
processed to generate the 3D model (Figure 4b) and transferred to a 3D modeling software (Blender). By transforming 
the 3D model into a field of vertices, marking the seam, and then unwrapping it, a 3D model of the human body  can 
be converted into a collection of garment patterns. These user-centric garment patterns can also be transported into a 
3D garment or clothing modeling software (Clo3D , Figure 4c) in order to visualize the fit.  Figure 4d and 5a present 
the vision of the PS-Suit with inflatables or pneumatic chambers fully-distributed across the body. The current version 
of the pneumatic system (the FlowIO Platform) limits the PS-Suit to having five inflation and vacuum controls (Figure 
4e), although other FlowIO modules can be integrated to incorporate more channels and cover other body parts. 
 
 
Fig.4: a) A subject in a Lenscloud  3D 
photogrammetry system, b) Garment pattern 
results after 3D modeling and unwrapping and 
c) visualization in Clo3D, d) Conceptual and e) 
actual inflation chambers placement. 
 
 
Fig.5: a) PS-Suit concept and b) illustration of our recent 
prototype flown in a parabolic flight, showing all the main 
component of the system (inflatable chambers, fabric 
compression sensors, physiological sensors, and main 
wireless module). 
For long-duration space flights, the durability of IVA clothing is also crucial. The garment’s fabric needs to be 
strong and tough enough to endure wear and tear. In addition to durability, safety is also a crucial consideration in 
designing IVA clothing. While protection from extreme external environments is not necessary, sa fety concerns for 
indoor clothing still exist 56. For instance, fire  protection is a significant issue in oxygen -rich environments. The PS-
Suit’s outer layer is adapted from a high -performance Nomex racing suit (Profox) with a combination of knitted 
Nomex around the joints  for freedom of movement  and a double-layer quilt-woven Nomex throughout. Nomex is a 
high-performance fiber with excellent tempe rature and mechanical resistance  and can be found as a base material 
complementing Gore-Tex and Kevlar in O rtho-Fabric, the outermost layer of EVA spacesuits 57. The seams of the 
racing suit were cut and tailor ed based on the wearer’s body circumferences  that were measured through the 3D 
photogrammetry and modeling. The materials of the fabric with the forms of the suit ensure the overall protective and 
compression functionality, mobility, and comfortability of the PS-Suit for IVA.  
The working prototype of the PS -Suit, as shown in Figure 5b and Figure 6d -f, consists of an array of inflatable 
chambers (five chambers distributed from the lower abdomen to the ankle) in one leg with a physiological and physical 
A 
 
8 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
activity sensing system and a pneumatic actuation system that enable both multimodal physiological sensing and 
active-dynamic compression. The inflatable chambers were integrated by sewing inner 4 -way stretch fa brics and 
embedding free -standing TPU bladders and piezoresistive-based textile pressure sensors , as discussed in detail in 
Section III.  
B. Physiological and Physical Sensing System 
The physiological and activity sensing module (Figure 6a) comprises a set of  skin-contact physiological sensors  
embedded in multiple locations across the PS-Suit (MAX30105 from Maxim and ADS1292R from Texas Instruments) 
and connected to  their central processing system  with Bluetooth low -energy capability (BLE, Feather NRF52840) 
through inter-integrated circuit (I 2C) and serial peripheral interface ( SPI) lines. It includes three biopotential and 
bioimpedance electrodes around the upper left chest (LC), right chest (RC), and lower left (LL) region of the body to 
monitor the heart's electrical activity or electrocardiography (ECG) and respiration . The respiration sensing is done 
through impedance measurement from these electrodes  using an ADS1292R (Analog Devices) 58. LC, RC, and LL 
cables were integrated from our main module into three different locations in  the upper-body region of the PS-Suit 
with snap connections for attaching the adhesive electrode pads. 
Two blood-flow sensing nodes are also distributed a round the left toe and right toe  through the wearer’s shoes . 
Our blood flow sensing mechanism is based on photoplethysmography (PPG), in which a light -emitting diode (red, 
infrared/IR, and green) illuminates the skin and a photodiode captures the reflected signal and light absorption caused 
by the blood circulation59. Blood oxygen saturation level can be derived from PPG based on the ratio of red vs IR light 
absorbance. Furthermore, by processing the ECG and PPG data, we can infer a pulse arrival time (PAT) that correlates 
to the wearer’s pulse wave velocity and blood pressure without needing an inflation cuff that could interfere with the 
circulation22 (in principle, as the suit is composed of inflatable elements, a cuff can also be intrinsically implemented 
if warranted).  
Five piezoresistive textile-based compression sensors distributed around the body and lower-leg are read through 
the ADC inputs of the system.  An inertial measurement unit (IMU) for gravity/tilt/acceleration data analysis and 
physical activity sensing is also integrated in this module. A graphical user interface  (GUI) has been developed  to 
visualize all the compression, physical activity, and physiological sensor data continuously in real-time (Figure 6b,7b). 
In summary, with our system and existing algorithms, the PS-Suit can perform wireless multimodal physiological and 
compression monitoring including, 
1) Heart rate and electrical activity of the heart through ECG signal 
2) Breathing rate and volume through ECG impedance sensing 
3) Blood flow and pulse-rate through the PPG signals 
4) Blood oxygen saturation through the PPG signals 
5) Skin temperature through the on-board pulse-oximetry temperature sensors 
6) Pulse-arrival time on each leg/toe through peak time-difference between ECG and PPG signals 
7) Physical activity and gravity levels through the IMU data 
8) Five compression forces distributed throughout the PS-Suit 
For the parabolic flight testing and evaluation, since the focus of the experiment was on dynamic compression and 
cardiovascular physiological sensing, we activated and recorded only a subset of these parameters: ECG, two PPGs, 
acceleration, and five compression sensors.  Overall, the physiological and physical sensing system operated at 
approximately 100 Hz including the BLE wireless data transfer operations.  
C. Pneumatic Actuation System 
The FlowIO pneumatic system (Figure 7a,c) consists of miniature motor pumps, circuits, and valves that can be 
wirelessly controlled through BLE and a microcontroller (Feather nrf52840) to control a set of five air chambers 
distributed throughout the PS -Suit. The entire system is designed to be compac t and light-weight, especially for 
wearable applications51. In our case, the pneumatic system with the physiological and physical sensing system are 
both stored in the pouch on the right side of PS-Suit and attached with a strap (Figure 6c). The main module of FlowIO 
contains 7 normally-closed solenoid valves in a manifold configuration, of which two are for inlet and outlet  (Figure 
7b), and the remaining 5 valves for programmable pneumatic input-output (I/O) ports with each port suppo rting the 
following functions: 
1) Inflation 
2) Vacuum 
3) Release to atmospheric pressure 
4) Pressure hold 
 
9 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
5) Pressure sensing 
6) Flow-rate variability 
The same pneumatic action can also be performed simultaneously on more than one port. The choice of normally-
closed valves allows pressure hold to occur by default, and therefore the system can maintain dif ferent pressures at 
different ports, even in the of f-state. While inflation and vacuum rely on the pumps, pressure release is passive and 
can happen from an initial state of either high pressure or vacuum. The pressure release operation exploits the fact that 
the pumps allow one-way flow even when not powered. Finally, flow rate variability is achieved by driving the pumps 
with pulse-width modulation (PWM) signals at variable duty cycles. Inflation chambers in the PS-Suit can be actuated 
subsequently to reach  a certain compression pressure value, for example, and then they can all be deflated 
simultaneously by opening all the pneumatic I/O ports. In the case of intense physica l activity or a sudden change in 
atmospheric pressure that would exert high pressure on the inflated chambers, pressure release can be set so that the 
inflation chambers can adapt and avoid bursting by releasing air passively. 
Besides the standard configuration  used here, our system supports 4 additional configurations, where the pumps 
can be connected in series or in parallel, and used either for inflation or for vacuum (Figure 7b). A series configuration 
achieves higher pressures, while a parallel configuration achieves higher flow rate. If inflation and release capabilities 
are required instead of vacuum, an inflation series or parallel configuration  can be implemented to maximize 
performance. On another hand, if only vacuum and release capabilities are required, the tubing can be reorganized for 
vacuum series or parallel configuration instead.  We used a Li-Po battery with a high C-rate (45C and 7.4V, AWANFI) 
to run 3V direct current (DC) air pump (RK -528TB, Skoocom) that can provide flow rates of up to 4.5L/min and  a 
pressure range of -60 to 150kPa (Figure 7d,e).  
V. Evaluation and Discussion 
A paraboloc flight study was conducted to test the functionality of the PS -Suit for wireless physiological sensing 
and dynamic compression in extreme gravity environments. It involved a series of rapid ascents and descents, creating 
periods of zeroG and hypergravity that simulate the environments astronauts experience during space missions. This 
preliminary study was run to provide insight into any necessary adjustments needed by  our spacesuit design and 
 
 
Fig.6: a) System schematic of the physiological and activity sensing module and pneumatic actuation module, 
b) wireless real-time recording of all sensing units, including physiological sensors (ECG and PPG on both 
toes), accelerometers, and compression sensors  (indicating a  pressure gradient), c) a test subject wearing 
tailored PS-Suit in a parabolic flight, and d-f) the final prototype of PS-Suit captured from various angles. 

 
10 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
operations to ensure that the system can withstand the rigors of spaceflight and the ISS environment expected during 
further development and testing. 
All experiments were conducted in compliance with the guidelines of  an IRB and were reviewed and approved by 
the ZERO-G Corporation and  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee on the Use of Humans as 
Experimental Subject (COUHES Protocol 2102000313). A male volunteer with no prior medical history of chronic 
cardiovascular or skin problems, mental health disease, or physical disability was recruited for participation in this 
test. Signed consent, including consent of photography during the test, was obtained from the individual after passing 
the pre-screening procedure. The subject wore the PS-Suit during cruising before the first set of flight parabolas, lay-
down on the floor during the hyper -gravity periods, and oriented in  head-down positions during the microgravity 
periods. In the case of emergency, overcompression, o r discomfort, a switch can be activated to quickly vacuum all 
of the air chambers in the PS-Suit. In addition, zippers distributed across the suit can also be used to immediately take 
it off. 
During the parabolas, the PS-Suit’s main module captured and sent data (100 Hz) from an ECG, two PPGs in RL 
(right leg) and LL (left leg), acceleration (x, y, and z-axis), and five fabric compression sensors to a computer through 
BLE communication for logging  (Figure 6b,c). The main module also controlled the pneumatic system and five air 
chambers from the computer through BLE communication (Figure 6b)  to provide waist-high gradient compression . 
The first set of parabolas was used for acclimatization and experiment preparation (making sure that the PS -Suit 
system and data transfer were all functioning properly) , the second set for pneumatic system activation  to simulate 
gradient compression , and the third and fourth  sets for physiological adaptation monitoring and evaluation  as the 
gradient compression was constantly applied on the RL until the end of the parabolic flight study.  
A. Compression Characterization 
To find the relationship between the fabric resistive compression pressure’s output in Ω with skin compression 
value in mmHg , a ground-test study was also conducted . A high-accuracy sub-bandage pressure monitor was used 
 
Fig.7: a) FlowIO pneumatic system that controls all the inflatable chambers for peristaltic pressure and 
gradient compression in the PS-Suit, b) GUI for controlling the five air flow valves, flow-rates, and scheduling 
the time of inflation and vacuum/deflation, c) explode d views of all the components making up the pneumatic 
system, d) pocket -size, light-weight system (coin for comparison) with e) each output valve connecting to the 
corresponding inflatable chamber through air tubes. 

 
11 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
(Kikuhime, TT Meditrade) for cross-validation purposes. As illustrated in Figure 8a, compression pressure in mmHg 
rises as the inflation time increases, and it is inversely proportional to the pressure sensor’s resistance. Based on the 
real-time ADC values of every inflatable pressure sensor during our parabolic flight campaign in Figure 6b-c (𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑙 
in succession: 650, 625, 600, 475, and 225) that correspond to inflation time, the effective skin compression pressure 
can be determined by first calculating the compression resistance from Equation 1 and 2. 
 
𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓
𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓+𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑥 𝑉𝑠 =  
𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑙
2𝐴𝐷𝐶(𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠)  𝑥 𝑉𝐴𝐷𝐶(𝑟𝑒𝑓)  (1) 
 
𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛=
𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 𝑥 𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑙
2𝐴𝐷𝐶(𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠)−  𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑙
   (2) 
 
With 𝑉𝑠 = 𝑉𝐴𝐷𝐶(𝑟𝑒𝑓) = 3.3 𝑉, 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 = 6.8𝑘 Ω, and 𝐴𝐷𝐶(𝑏𝑖𝑡𝑠) = 12, 𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(1−5) can be calculated and then 
fit to a smooth curve as shown in Figure 8b. From the figure fitting, an applied gradient compression in the PS -Suit 
of around 2.4 kPa (18 mmHg) in the lower abdomen, 2.6 kPa (21 mmHg) in the upper leg regions, 3.9 kPa (30 mmHg) 
around the lower leg, and 7 kPa (52 mmHg) closer to the ankle was observed. These compression values (Figure 8c) 
satisfied the typical compression  requirement for countermeasure  support against spaceflight orthostatic intolerance 
during re-entry, landing, and post-landing39. Not only can it achieve a compression gradient typical for an OI and GCG 
suit40,41, the PS-Suit can also exert a compression level higher than that typically used for medical purposes (Class 4). 
B. Physiological Adaptation during Parabolic Flight 
Heart-rate variability and blood flow can give us insights into the modulation of the cardiovascular system. One 
of the purposes of PS-Suit testing on the third and fourth of the parabolic flight is to measure and analyze the change 
in these physiological parameters throughout various gravity levels: normal, hyper, and microgravity and under waist-
high gradient compression. As shown in Figure 9a, there were a total of 20 parabolas separated into four sets with a 
few-minute break (~1 g) in between. The first set consisted of two cycles of lunar gravity (~0.16 g), two cycles of 
Martian gravity (~0.38 g), and a cycle of micro gravity (~0 g), each running for around 20 s with  approximately 20 s 
of hypergravity periods in between  (~1.8 g). The rest of parabolic flight  sets constituted five 20 s cycles of 
microgravity (~0 g) and hypergravity (~1.8 g) periods (Figure 9c). 
 
 
Fig.8: The relationship between a) actuation time of an embe dded bladder (~15 x 20 cm) and compression 
pressure with Kikuhime pressure monitor (mmHg) and the integrated piezoresistive sensor ( Ω), b) resistance 
of the piezoresistive sensor vs compression pressure , and c) compression pressure level vs body region.  Fig.8: 
The relationship between a) actuation time of an embedded bladder (~15 x 20 cm) and compression pressure 
with Kikuhime pressure monitor (mmHg) and the integrated piezoresistive sensor ( Ω), b) resistance of the 
piezoresistive sensor vs compression pressure, and c) compression pressure level vs body region. 

 
12 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
 
Fig.9: a) G-force of the parabolic flight measured through an IMU bolted to a frame on the surface of the plane, 
b) An example of ECG and PPG data of the parabolic flight test subject for peak-to-peak PAT finding, c) IMU 
acceleration data of the plane and of the sub ject showing zero and hypergravity periods during the fourth 
parabola set with d) zoomed -in microgravity acceleration, e) Right -leg PPG and ECG data during the fourth 
parabola set with f) a zoomed-in version showing the sequence of peaks in both signals. 
 
Current BP measurement devices employ an inflatable cuff and mechanism and thus cannot be used for rapid and 
continuous measurement of cardiovascular dynamics. One of the primary cuffless, unobtrusive approaches used to 
gauge blood flow is through measurin g PTT using on -skin or on -body PPG sensors, which indicates the time 
difference between two pulses at two different locations (two PPG signals), or the PAT, which is the time it takes for 
a pulse to travel from the heart ( defined by a peak in ECG signal or the R-wave) to a peripheral artery ( measured by 
PPG on finger, ear, or toe, for instance). PAT and PTT have been found to indicate changes in pulse wave velocity 
and are inversely correlated to systolic blood pressure22,23. Since the cardiovascular track is the longest from the heart 
to the toe, and we are applying compression from the body to the ankle with the PS-Suit, we are interested in measuring 
the PAT through our ECG electrodes on the chest and PPG sensor that we embedded on the shoe to interface with 
each toe. A previous study discovered that PAT on t he toe showed a superior performance as an SBP indicator than 
PAT and PTT measurement on the fingers60. 
In order to calculate the length of this PAT interval, the time of all ECG and PPG waveform peaks must be found. 
This involves a peak -finding algorithm, composed of a noise -reducing process, an algorithm to identify where the 
curve changes from increasing to decreasing, and a filter to remove fluctuations that do not truly constitute peaks from 
the final set of peaks  returned. This peak-finding algorithm was performed independently on both the raw ECG and 
PPG data. The noise-reducing algorithm involves averaging the five nearest data points in order to observe the general 
trends of the curves rather than being sensitive to every fluctuation in the data. The next step computed the differences 

 
13 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
between consecutive data points in the averaged data and determined whether the sign of this difference changed since 
the previous calculation. If the difference change d from positive to negative, it means that the curve’s behavior is 
changing from increasing to decreasing, indicating that a peak has occurred. The detected PPGpeak should be at a 
convex maximum of the pulse wave. Figure 9b shows a sample of ECG and PPG data on the left -leg (LL) and right-
leg (RL), with each peak represented as tECG(R-peak), tPPG(LL) , and tPPG(RL). Our algorithm criteria are that the detected 
PPGpeak should exist right after an ECGR-peak and before the next one (Equation 3).  
tECG(Rpeak)(n)< tPPG(LL)(n), tPPG(RL)(n)< tECG(Rpeak)(n+1)  (3) 
PAT(LL)(n) = tPPG(LL)(n) - tECG(R-peak) (n)  (4) 
 
PAT(RL)(n) = tPPG(RL)(n) - tECG(R-peak) (n)  (5) 
 
𝐵𝑃𝑀 =
60
∆𝑡̅̅̅  (6) 
 
∆𝑡̅̅̅ =  𝑛
∑ (𝑡𝑖 − 𝑡𝑖−1
𝑛
2 ) (7) 
 
Once the peaks of the heart rate and pulse waves are identified, the next step is computing the delay between them. 
A specific PPG peak corresponds to the ECG peak that it follows, and the difference is taken between the timestamps 
of both peaks. These values a re averaged to find the approximate PAT for a given time interval  (Equation 4 and 5) . 
The same peak-finding algorithm is used to calculate the Beats Per Minute (BPM)  or HRV from an ECG signal. By 
finding the average time (∆𝑡̅̅̅) between consecutive numbers of peaks (n) and dividing 60 by this value, the average 
number of heartbeats per minute can be determined (Equation 6 and 7). 
Figure 9e,f show both the representative ECG and PPG (RL) signals during the fourth set of flight parabolas with 
the corresponding encountered acceleration (Figure 9c,d). Ten to fifteen seconds of  ECG and PPGs sensor data were 
input from each micro and hypergravity parabolas and before each parabola set (e.g., pre-parabola, during 1 g ) into 
our peak-finding algorithms to calculate a series of PAT and BPM data for both RL and LL that correspond to PAT 
from the leg with and without compression, respectively. The data were cut  from their full -length to reduce 
physiological adaptation noise caused by gravity transitions. On average, the algorithm collected 12 peaks  (standard 
deviation, SD = 2) for each hyper and microgravity segment. The mean PATs with their SD from all of these peaks 
during each hyper and microgravity period and for both the third and fourth parabola sets  were then calculated and 
averaged. 
The results of physiological sensor data processing for both the third and fourth parabola sets are depicted in Figure 
10. As can be seen in both parabola sets, micro and hypergravity induced an increase in PAT  from the pre-parabola 
state for both case s of RL and LL.  In microgravity, there is a shift in fluid distribution from the lower to the upper 
body, where it is harder for the heart to pump blood toward the leg s, resulting in decreased blood flow around these 
regions18. This corresponds to lower blood pressure and an increase in PAT, as reflected in Figure 10a,b. An increase 
can also be observed in the case of hypergravity, which can be explained by the high-angle and high-speed pull-up or 
“nose-up” maneuver of the parabola. As the subject lay down on the surface of the plane with the leg facing toward 
the nose most of the time, acceleration of the plane caused blood to pool  toward the head, which reduced blood 
distribution around the leg. This led to an increase in PAT that was mostly higher than in the microgravity cases 
(except in LL, Set 3).  
A trend can also be observed from the comparison between RL and LL. The leg with compression (RL) generally 
shows a higher  PAT than the one without compression (LL) in both parabola sets. Previous studies concluded that 
external mechanical compression  decreases regional arterial stiffness  and PWV , and elicit s significant 
vasodilation61,62. Since PWV is inversely proportional to PAT , our results thus agree with this study. However, there 
is no comparison data available of PAT from the same leg  before and after compression  due to the short duration of 
both micro and hypergravity periods . In this case, there is a possibility of anatomical difference between arteries of 
the subject’s legs, which would introduce an offset to the PAT 63. 
 
 
14 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
 
Fig.10: Pulse arrival time between both legs of the subject (RL: compression, LL: without compression) during 
pre-parabola, hypergravity, and microgravity periods on the a) third and b) fourth set. c-d) Heart-rate in beats 
per minute (BPM) of the subject during pre-parabola, hypergravity, and microgravity periods on the third and 
fourth set, respectively (graph points and spreads correspond to the mean and SD).  
 
HR/BPMs are generally observed to be  lower in microgravity due to the lack of gravitational pull on the body, 
which makes it easier for blood to return to the heart and reduces the workload on the cardiovascular system 24. 
However, the BPM results between pre -parabola, hypergravity, and microgravity on both parabola sets  show the 
opposite. There are other factors that could influence the heart rate, including the preceding hypergravity phases , as 
well as the mental stress and arousal of the subject 21. Novice flyers, particularly those who have not experience d 
weightlessness, may experience an increase in heart rate during the parabolic flight due to excitement or anxiety 64. 
The floating experience and sense of losing control and balance in microgravity periods  triggers the release of 
adrenaline and other stress hormones that can cause symphatetic response through an increase in heart rate, while the 
activity of laying down during hypergravity periods could induce a sense of calmness,  and through parasymphatetic 
modulation, reduce heart-rate activity, as shown in our BPM data (Figure 10c,d). While these results demonstrate the 
functionality of our PS-Suit, further developments, experiments, and studies are still required.  The short duration of 
parabolic flights only allow us to observe and analyze transient behaviors of physiological response as they hinder the 
cardiovascular system from reaching a steady state.  
C. Limitations and Future Work 
This paper  presents a design framework and  a proof -of-principle validation of PS-Suit. However, there are 
limitations to the current design, which can be addressed through future developments and evaluations. One important 
consideration is the need for closed-loop feedback and control mechanisms to regulate the amount of compression in 
the suit based on input from fabric compression sensors and cardiovascular health parameters. It requires  an intimate 
link and synchronization between the pneumatic and physiological and physical sensing systems. This effort will allow 
for a more controlled compression and effective intervention. Additionally, there is a need to develop firmware that 
can automate and simulate pe ristaltic compression throughout the spacesuit, which can help to improve circulation 
and reduce muscle fatigue65.  
The current spacesuit design also only includes five inflatable chambers running from the waist to the ankle of one 
of the legs. While this provides some degree of intervention, it is limited in its effectiveness due to the scale and spatial 
resolution of the chambers. In order to address this limitation, future versions will need to include higher compression 
that covers a larger portion of the body, allowing for greater control over the level and timing of compression. This 
will require the development of modular pneumatic system hardware with air source and output extension, so it can 
accommodate the high number of miniature air  chambers that are seamlessly embedded in the fabric of the suit . In 

 
15 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
order to improve the wearability, breathability, and comfortability of spacesuits, combination of durable Nomex and 
TPU fibers and fabrics can be explored. By using digital fabrication tools and knitting these fibers into a custom full-
body 3D garment based on a 3D body scan,  one can develop a seamless PS-Suit that conforms to the unique shape of 
each individual astronaut. The knit  and channel  structures in the PS -Suit can also leverage multi -layer and 
computational design to maximize positive compression toward the body  while optimizing mobility66. They could 
also be designed to provide axial load and pressure around the suit to help in mitigating musculoskeletal problems and 
spinal elongation relating to long-term microgravity exposures38. 
Future evaluations shound incorporate parabolic flight test on multiple subjects, including expert flyers who would 
exhibit more stable affective response, to evaluate how active compression of the PS-Suit can influence cardiovascular 
and other health parameters, including HR, RR, PAT, PWV, and BP . Through spatial compression and sensing, it is 
also possible to perform distributed oscillometry to measure blood pressure in primary locations of the human body. 
It would also be beneficial to test how the suit  can function similarly to a LBNP chamber by providing an inverse 
pressure gradient to distribute blood flow toward the lower body during cruising and operation in long-term 
spaceflight. It can also simulate GCG, that aims to reduce OI during re -entry, landing, and  post-landing by 
compressing the lower -body to shift blood distribution toward the upper body.  Due to the short duration of zero -
gravity in parabolic flights, ground testing through bed rest studies (exploiting different angles from head-down-tilt to 
upright bed rest) can also be leveraged to simulate some effects of weightlessness and monitor the transient and steady-
state physiological change of the subject  with and without active compression 67. Ultimately, an ideal case will be 
evaluating PS-Suit functionality during a long-term space mission, as the astronauts launch from the Earth to the ISS, 
perform their daily tasks and experiments during IVA, and return to the Earth. 
The PS-Suit platform could not only support cardiovascular health monitoring and microgravity adaptation , but 
also augment astronaut s’ physical training through active muscle compression, and provide emotional support and 
telepresence communication through comforting haptic transfer68. The design and control framework of the suit will 
also be applicable in other health, rehabilitation, exercise, or soft robotics applications, not only in outer space, but 
also on the Earth, in the form of anti-gravity suits, athletic or lymphedema compression garments, shapewear, corsets 
for exoskeleton and posture correction, and surgical tourniquets. 
VI. Conclusion 
The PS -Suit is  an active sensing -compression intravehicular activity spacesuit that can simultaneously perform 
wireless remote health diagnostics,  as well as exert spatiotemporal pressure across the body.  The suit  has been 
designed to optimize wearability, functionality, and durability for each individual wearer.  By integrating  both 
physiological sensing and pneumatic actuation systems, the PS-Suit can facilitate closed-loop and timely response for 
astronauts to regulate their cardiovascular dynamics. Preliminary characterization and parabolic flight tests show the 
capabilities of the PS -Suit as a tool for  researchers to correspondingly study the direct influence of active -dynamic 
compression and micro-to-hypergravity on various physiological markers. Overall, the PS -Suit has potential 
applications to safeguard the health of astronauts , and eventually civilian space tra velers during their time in the ISS 
and extended voyages to the moon, Mars, and perhaps beyond. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Ariel Ekblaw, Sean Auffinger, and Maggie Coblentz for their help in the planning , 
realization, and testing  phase of this project, Shreyam Kacker for providing the parabolic flight IMU data, and  Jeff 
Hoffman, Cady Coleman, Tony Antonelli, Nicholas de Monchaux, Juliana Cherston, Steve Boxall, ZERO-G 
Corporation, and the Responsive Environments Group. This work w as funded through MIT Media Lab’s Space 
Exploration Initiative NASA-TRISH Grant and the MIT Media Lab Research Consortia. 
 
References 
1Clément, G. Fundamentals of Space Medicine. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011. 
2Landon, L. B., Rokholt, C., Slack, K. J., and Pecena, Y. “Selecting Astronauts for Long -Duration Exploration Missions: 
Considerations for Team Performance and Functioning.” Reach, Vol. 5, 2017, pp. 33–56. 
3Fortescue, P., Swinerd, G., and Stark, J. Spacecraft Systems Engineering. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
4Hill, T. R., and Johnson, B. J. EVA Space Suit Architecture: Low Earth Orbit vs. Moon vs. Mars. 2010. 
5Baker, E. S., Barratt, M. R., Sams, C. F., and Wear, M. L. Human Response to Space Flight. In Principles of clinical medicine 
for space flight, Springer, 2019, pp. 367–411. 
 
16 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
6Scheuring, R. A., Jones, J. A., Novak, J. D., Polk, J. D., Gillis, D. B., Schmid, J., Duncan, J. M., and Davis, J. R. “The Apollo 
Medical Operations Project: Recommendations to Improve Crew Health and Performance for Future Exploration Missions and 
Lunar Surface Operations.” Acta Astronautica, Vol. 63, Nos. 7–10, 2008, pp. 980–987. 
7Johnson, R. L., Hoffler, G. W., Nicogossian, A. E., Berg man, S. A., and Jackson, M. M. “Lower Body Negative Pressure: 
Third Manned Skylab Mission.” Biomedical results from Skylab, Vol. 377, 1977, p. 284. 
8Marshall-Goebel, K., Laurie, S. S., Alferova, I. V, Arbeille, P., Auñón-Chancellor, S. M., Ebert, D. J., Lee, S. M. C., Macias, 
B. R., Martin, D. S., and Pattarini, J. M. “Assessment of Jugular Venous Blood Flow Stasis and Thrombosis during Spaceflight. ” 
JAMA network open, Vol. 2, No. 11, 2019, pp. e1915011–e1915011. 
9Carvil, P., Baptista, R., and Russomano, T. “The Human Body in a Microgravity Environment: Long Term Adaptations and 
Countermeasures.” Aviation in Focus-Journal of Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2013, pp. 10–22. 
10Scott, J. P. R., Weber, T., and Green, D. A. “Introduction to the Frontiers Research Topic: Optimization of Exercise 
Countermeasures for Human Space Flight –Lessons from Terrestrial Physiology and Operational Considerations.” Frontiers in 
physiology, Vol. 10, 2019, p. 173. 
11Griffin, B. N., Rashford, R., Gaylin, S., Bell, D., and Harro, J. The Wait -Less EVA Solution: Single -Person Spacecraft. In 
ASCEND 2020, 2020, p. 4170. 
12Platts, S. H., Tuxhorn, J. A., Ribeiro, L. C., Stenger,  M. B., Lee, S., and Meck, J. V. “Compression Garments as 
Countermeasures to Orthostatic Intolerance.” Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, Vol. 80, No. 5, 2009, pp. 437–442. 
13Waldie, J. M., and Newman, D. J. “A Gravity Loading Countermeasure Skin suit.” Acta Astronautica, Vol. 68, Nos. 7 –8, 
2011, pp. 722–730. 
14Artiles, A. D., Trigg, C., Jethani, H., Tritchler, S., and Newman, D. Physiological and Comfort Assessment of the Gravity 
Loading Countermeasure Skinsuit during Exercise. 2016. 
15Granberry, R., Dunne, L., and Holschuh, B. Effects of Anthropometric Variability and Dimensional Change Due to Posture 
on Orthostatic Intolerance Garments. 2017. 
16Wicaksono, I., Shtarbanov, A., Slater, R., Ranade, E., and Paradiso, J. Peristaltic (PS) Suit: Active B ioelectronic Sensing-
Compression Spacesuit for Microgravity Adaptation and Cardiovascular Deconditioning. In ASCEND 2022, 2022, p. 4208. 
17Zhu, M., Do, T. N., Hawkes, E., and Visell, Y. “Fluidic Fabric Muscle Sheets for Wearable and Soft Robotics.” Soft robotics, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2020, pp. 179–197. 
18Hargens, A. R., and Richardson, S. “Cardiovascular Adaptations, Fluid Shifts, and Countermeasures Related to Space Flight.” 
Respiratory physiology & neurobiology, Vol. 169, 2009, pp. S30–S33. 
19Heer, M., and Paloski, W. H. “Space Motion Sickness: Incidence, Etiology, and Countermeasures.” Autonomic Neuroscience, 
Vol. 129, Nos. 1–2, 2006, pp. 77–79. 
20Lee, S. M. C., Ribeiro, L. C., Laurie, S. S., Feiveson, A. H., Kitov, V. V, Kofman, I. S., Macias, B. R., Rosenberg , M., 
Rukavishnikov, I. V, and Tomilovskaya, E. S. “Efficacy of Gradient Compression Garments in the Hours after Long -Duration 
Spaceflight.” Frontiers in physiology, Vol. 11, 2020, p. 784. 
21Aerts, W., Joosen, P., Widjaja, D., Varon, C., Vandeput, S., Van Huffel, S., and Aubert, A. Heart Rate and Blood Pressure 
Variability under Moon, Mars and Zero Gravity Conditions during Parabolic Flights. No. 706, 2012, pp. 1. 
22McCall, C., Rostosky, R., Wiard, R. M., Inan, O. T., Giovangrandi, L., Cuttino, C. M., and K ovacs, G. T. A. Noninvasive 
Pulse Transit Time Measurement for Arterial Stiffness Monitoring in Microgravity. 2015. 
23Wood, K. N., Greaves, D. K., and Hughson, R. L. “Interrelationships between Pulse Arrival Time and Arterial Blood Pressure 
during Postural Transitions before and after Spaceflight.” Journal of Applied Physiology, Vol. 127, No. 4, 2019, pp. 1050–1057. 
24Baevsky, R. M., Baranov, V. M., Funtova, I. I., Diedrich, A., Pashenko, A. V, Chernikova, A. G., Drescher, J., Jordan, J., and 
Tank, J. “Auto nomic Cardiovascular and Respiratory Control during Prolonged Spaceflights Aboard the International Space 
Station.” Journal of Applied Physiology, Vol. 103, No. 1, 2007, pp. 156–161. 
25Hughson, R. L. Studying Cardiovascular Health in Microgravity. 
https://blogs.nasa.gov/ISS_Science_Blog/2016/05/04/studying-cardiovascular-health-in-microgravity/. Accessed Sep. 18, 2022. 
26Wicaksono, I., Tucker, C. I., Sun, T., Guerrero, C. A., Liu, C., Woo, W. M., Pence, E. J., and Dagdeviren, C. “A Tailored, 
Electronic Textile Conformable Suit for Large -Scale Spatiotemporal Physiological Sensing in Vivo.” npj Flexible Electronics , 
2020. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-020-0068-y. 
27Zhang, H., Li, W., Tao, X., Xu, P., and Liu, H. Textile -Structured Human Body Surface Biopotential Signal Acquisition 
Electrode. 2011. 
28Heo, J. S., Eom, J., Kim, Y. H., and Park, S. K. Recent Progress of Textile -Based Wearable Electronics: A Comprehensive 
Review of Materials, Devices, and Applications. Small. 
29Payra, S., Wicaksono, I., Cherston, J., Honnet, C., Sumini, V., and Paradiso, J. A. "Feeling Through Spacesuits: Application 
of Space -Resilient E -Textiles to Enable Haptic Feedback on Pressurized Extravehicular Suits." In 2021 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference (50100), pp. 1-12. 2021. 
30Wicaksono, I., Cherston, J., and Paradiso, J. A. “Electronic Textile Gaia: Ubiquitous Computational Substrates Across 
Geometric Scales.” IEEE Pervasive Computing, 2021. 
31Cherston, J., and Paradiso, J. A. “SpaceSkin: Development of Aerospace -Grade Electronic Textile for Simultaneous 
Protection and High Velocity Impact Characterization.” Sensors and Smart Structures Technologies for Civil, Mechanical, and 
Aerospace Systems, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2513962. 
 
17 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
32Villa-Colín, J., Shaw, T., Toscano, W., and Cowings, P. Evaluation of Astroskin Bio-Monitor during High Intensity Physical 
Activities. No. 5, 2018, pp. 262–265. 
33Dalsgaard, C., and Sterrett, R. “White Paper on S mart Textile Garments and Devices: A Market Overview of Smart Textile 
Wearable Technologies.” Market Opportunities for Smart Textiles, Ohmatex, Denmark, 2014. 
34Tasnim, F., Sadraei, A., Datta, B., Khan, M., Choi, K. Y., Sahasrabudhe, A., Vega Gálvez, T. A., Wicaksono, I., Rosello, O., 
Nunez-Lopez, C., and Dagdeviren, C. Towards Personalized Medicine: The Evolution of Imperceptible Health-Care Technologies. 
Foresight, 2018. 
35Bellisle, R., Bjune, C., and Newman, D. "Considerations for Wearable Sensors to Mon itor Physical Performance during 
Spaceflight Intravehicular Activities."  In 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & 
Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 4160-4164. 2020. 
36Ekblaw, A., Cherston, J., Liu, F., Wicaksono, I., Haddad, D. D., Valentina, S., and Paradiso, J. A. “From UbiComp to 
Universe—Moving Pervasive Computing Research Into Space Applications.” IEEE Pervasive Computing, 2023. 
37Petersen, N., Jaekel, P., Rosenberger, A., Weber, T., Scott, J., Castrucci, F., Lambrecht, G., Ploutz -Snyder, L., Damann, V., 
and Kozlovskaya, I. “Exercise in Space: The European Space Agency Approach to in-Flight Exercise Countermeasures for Long-
Duration Missions on ISS.” Extreme physiology & medicine, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2016, pp. 1–13. 
38Bellisle, R., Ortiz, C., Porter, A., Harvey, A., Arquilla, K., Bjune, C., Waldie, J., and Newman, D. "The Mk-7 Gravity Loading 
Countermeasure Skinsuit: Evaluation and Preliminary Results." In 2022 IEEE Aerospace Conference (AERO), pp. 1-11. 2022. 
39Jacobs, S., and Doherty, M. Prevention of Orthostatic Intolerance for Post -Shuttle Operations: A Comparison of Active and 
Passive Garments. 2011. 
40Stenger, M. B., Brown, A. K., Lee, S., Locke, J. P., and Platts, S. H. “Gradient Compression Garments as a Countermeasure 
to Post-Spaceflight Orthostatic Intolerance.” Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, Vol. 81, No. 9, 2010, pp. 883–887. 
41Stenger, M. B., Lee, S., Westby, C. M., Ribeiro, L. C., Phillips, T. R., Martin, D. S., and Platts, S. H. “Abdomen-High Elastic 
Gradient Compression Garments during Post -Spaceflight Stand Tests.” Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine , Vol. 84, 
No. 5, 2013, pp. 459–466. 
42Holschuh, B. T., and Newman, D. J. “Morphing Compr ession Garments for Space Medicine and Extravehicular Activity 
Using Active Materials.” Aerospace medicine and human performance, Vol. 87, No. 2, 2016, pp. 84–92. 
43Duvall, J., Granberry, R., Dunne, L. E., Holschuh, B., Johnson, C., Kelly, K., Johnson, B.,  and Joyner, M. The Design and 
Development of Active Compression Garments for Orthostatic Intolerance. No. 40672, 2017, pp. V001T01A013. 
44Newman, D., Hoffman, J., Bethke, K., Blaya, J., Carr, C., and Pitts, B. “Astronaut Bio -Suit System for Exploration Cl ass 
Missions.” NIAC Phase II Final Report, 2005. 
45NASA. Rubber Vacuum Pants That Suck. https://blogs.nasa.gov/ISS_Science_Blog/2015/06/02/rubber -vacuum-pants-that-
suck/. Accessed May 1, 2023. 
46Attias, J., Philip, A. T. C., Waldie, J., Russomano, T., Simon, N. E., and David, A. G. “The Gravity-Loading Countermeasure 
Skinsuit (GLCS) and Its Effect upon Aerobic Exercise Performance.” Acta Astronautica, Vol. 132, 2017. 
47NASA. Launch Entry Suit. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Launch_entry_suit.jpg . Accessed May 1, 2023. 
48Space, C. New Exhibit Tells “stranger than Fiction” Tale of Aerospace Medicine. http://www.collectspace.com/news/news -
070221a-stranger-than-fiction-aerospace-medicine-museum-of-flight.html. Accessed May 1, 2023. 
49Wicaksono, I., and Paradiso, J. A. “FabricKeyboard  : Multimodal Textile Sensate Media as an Expressive and Deformable 
Musical Interface.” Proceedings of the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2017. 
50Wicaksono, I., Hwang, P. G., Droubi, S., Wu, F. X., Serio, A. N., Yan, W., and Paradiso, J. A. "3DKnITS: Three-Dimensional 
Digital Knitting of Intelligent Textile Sensor for Activity Recognition and Biomechanical Monitoring." In 44th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 2403-2409. 2022. 
51Shtarbanov, A. "FlowIO Development Platform --The Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi” for Soft Robotics."  In Extended abstracts 
of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 1-6. 2021. 
52Karlsson, A., Rosander, J., Romu, T., Tallberg, J., Grönqvist, A., Borga, M., and Dahlqvist Leinhard, O. “Automatic and 
Quantitative Assessment of Regional Muscle Volume by Multi‐atlas Segmentation Using Whole‐body Water –Fat MRI.” Journal 
of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Vol. 41, No. 6, 2015, pp. 1558–1569. 
53Risso, A., Ciana, A., Achilli, C., Antonutto, G., and Minetti, G. “Neocytolysis: None, One or Many? A Reappraisal and Future 
Perspectives.” Frontiers in physiology, Vol. 5, 2014, p. 54. 
54Zeagler, C. Where to Wear It: Functional, Technical, and Social Considerations in on -Body Location for Wearable 
Technology 20 Years of Designing for Wearability. 2017. 
55Liu, R., Lao, T. T., Little, T. J., Wu, X., and Ke, X. “Can Heterogeneous Compression Textile Design Reshape Skin Pressures? 
A Fundamental Study.” Textile Research Journal, Vol. 88, No. 17, 2018, pp. 1915–1930. 
56Fratto, L. A., and others. “Evaluating the Performance of Fibers and Fabrics for Astronaut’s IVA Wardrobes for Long 
Duration Space Flight.” 2005. 
57Özlenen, E., and Paul, R. Composite Textiles in High -Performance Apparel. In High-performance apparel, Elsevier, 2018, 
pp. 377–420. 
58Zhou, B., Chen, X., Hu, X., Ren, R., Tan, X., Fang, Z., and Xia, S. A Bluetooth Low Energy Approach for Monitoring 
Electrocardiography and Respiration. 2013. 
59Bagha, S., and Shaw, L. “A Real Time Analysis of PPG Signal for Measurement of SpO2 and Pulse Rate.” International 
journal of computer applications, Vol. 36, No. 11, 2011, pp. 45–50. 
 
18 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
60Block, R. C., Yavarimanesh, M., Natarajan, K., Carek, A., Mousavi, A., Chandrasekhar, A., Kim, C. -S., Zhu, J., Schifitto, 
G., Mestha, L. K., and others. “Conventional Pulse Transit Times as Markers of Blood Pressure Changes in Humans.” Scientific 
Reports, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2020, p. 16373. 
61Heffernan, K. S., Edwards, D. G., Rossow, L., Jae, S. Y., and Fernhall, B. “External Mechanical Compression Reduces 
Regional Arterial Stiffness.” European journal of applied physiology, Vol. 101, 2007, pp. 735–741. 
62Szolnoky, G., Gavallér, H., Gönczy, A., Bihari, I., Kemény, L., Forster, T., and Nemes, A. “The Effects of Below -Knee 
Medical Compression Stockings on Pulse Wave Velocity of Young Healthy Volunteers.” The Journal of Strength \& Conditioning 
Research, Vol. 35, No. 1, 2021, pp. 275–279. 
63Sondej, T., Sieczkowski, K., Olszewski, R., and Dobrowolski, A. “Simultaneous Multi -Site Measurement System for the 
Assessment of Pulse Wave Delays.” Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 39, No. 2, 2019, pp. 488–502. 
64Johnson, K. T., Taylor, S., Fedor, S., Jaques, N., Chen, W., and Picard, R. W. Vomit Comet Physiology: Autonomic Changes 
in Novice Flyers. 2018. 
65Zhu, M., Ferstera, A., Dinulescu, S., Kastor, N., Linnander, M., Hawkes, E. W., and Visell, Y. “A Peristaltic Soft, Wearable 
Robot for Compression and Massage Therapy.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01339, 2022. 
66Tessmer, L., Goldstein, G., Herrera -Arcos, G., Korolovych, V., Bellisle, R., Paige, C., Shallal, C., Sahasrabudhe, A., Herr, 
H., Boriskina, S., Newman, D., and Tibbits, S. "3D Knit Spacesuit Sleeve with Multifunctional Fibers and Tunable Compression." 
In ACADIA 2022. 
67Watenpaugh, D. E. “Analogs of Microgravity: Head-down Tilt and Water Immersion.” Journal of Applied Physiology, Vol. 
120, No. 8, 2016, pp. 904–914. 
68Teh, J.K.S., Adrian, D. C., Roshan, L. P. Yongsoon, C., Vuong, T., and Sha, L. "Huggy Pajama: a mobile parent and child 
hugging communication system." In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Interaction design and children, pp. 250-
257. 2008. 
 
 