A Modular Pneumatic Soft Gripper Design for Aerial Grasping and
Landing*
Hiu Ching Cheung 1, Ching-Wei Chang 2, Bailun Jiang 1, Chih-Yung Wen1 and Henry K. Chu 3
Abstract— Aerial robots have garnered significant attention
due to their potential applications in various industries, such
as inspection, search and rescue, and drone delivery. Successful
missions often depend on the ability of these robots to grasp
and land effectively. This paper presents a novel modular soft
gripper design tailored explicitly for aerial grasping and landing
operations. The proposed modular pneumatic soft gripper
incorporates a feed-forward proportional controller to regulate
pressure, enabling compliant gripping capabilities. The modular
connectors of the soft fingers offer two configurations for the
4-tip soft gripper, H-base (cylindrical) and X-base (spherical),
allowing adaptability to different target objects. Additionally,
the gripper can serve as a soft landing gear when deflated,
eliminating the need for an extra landing gear. This design
reduces weight, simplifies aerial manipulation control, and
enhances flight efficiency. We demonstrate the efficacy of indoor
aerial grasping and achieve a maximum payload of 217 g using
the proposed soft aerial vehicle and its H-base pneumatic soft
gripper (808 g).
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
Aerial grasping [1] is a rapidly growing research field, par-
ticularly in the context of unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs)
used for drone delivery such as food delivery [2], search
and rescue [3], environmental cleaning [4], and medical
goods delivery [5]. Ensuring the safety and efficiency of
goods during drone delivery is critical. Hence, we aim to
address these concerns by proposing a novel solution: a soft
aerial vehicle (SA V) equipped with a modular soft pneumatic
gripper, which has received limited attention in previous
studies. Soft grippers offer a promising alternative to rigid
grippers due to their simplified control systems, reduced
complexity, and excellent force absorption capabilities. To
leverage the principles of soft robotics, these lightweight and
controllable mechanisms provide stability during grasping
by dampening impact forces. Their flexibility allows for
a broader range of object dimensions, increasing grasping
tolerance. Positioned beneath the center of gravity of the
*This work was supported by the Research Centre of Unmanned Au-
tonomous Systems (RCUAS) [P0046487], The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University
1Hiu Ching Cheung, Bailun Jiang, and Chih-Yung Wen are with
Department of Aeronautical and Aviation Engineering, The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
athena-hiu-ching.cheung@connect.polyu.hk,
bailun-robin.jiang@connect.polyu.hk,
chihyung.wen@polyu.edu.hk
2Ching-Wei Chang is with Hong Kong Center for Construction Robotics,
, Hong Kong ccw@ust.hk
3Henry K. Chu is with Department of Mechanical Engineering, The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
henry.chu@polyu.edu.hk
Fig. 1: Illustration of the proposed modular pneumatic soft
gripper with a conventional drone.
SA V , the soft gripper can inflate and deflate to securely grasp
objects, improving grasping efficiency and reducing mission
time. Moreover, replacing the rigid landing gear with the
proposed soft gripper as the landing mechanism enhances
the capability of aerial manipulation for the SA V [6]. It
eliminates the need for additional actuators and simplifies
the control system by eliminating the complicated operations
of the landing gear adjustment during takeoff, landing, and
grasping. Furthermore, the modular design of the gripper en-
ables configuration changes to accommodate various object
sizes and shapes, for instance, considering the diverse shapes
of food packages prevalent in food delivery scenarios.
B. Related Work
Inspired by biological systems like birds [7], soft grippers
have demonstrated the ability to mitigate contact forces and
compensate for grasping inaccuracies, exemplifying the con-
cept of morphological computation, which combines passive
mechanical components with explicit control [8]. To leverage
these advantages, some researchers have developed a bio-
inspired tendon-actuated soft gripper, as the bending capa-
bility of the gripper can be easily controlled by manipulating
the attached tendon [9], [10], [11]. In the context of perching,
Ramon et al. [12] have designed a soft landing gear system
that allows an aerial drone to autonomously perch on pipes in
industrial environments, providing robust attachment using
nylon strands and offering a modular design for gripper
replacement. This soft gripper has demonstrated successful
closure around pipes in outdoor experiments, enabling the
quadrotor to perform well even in uncertain and windy con-
ditions despite imperfect centering or fastening. Furthermore,
Fishman et al. [13], [6] have developed a tendon-actuated soft
gripper for a soft drone inspired by the dexterity of human
fingers. Their approach eliminates the need for gripper state
measurement, operating the soft gripper in an open-loop
manner to grasp objects of unknown shape on unknown
surfaces, relying on the centroid of the objects.
arXiv:2311.00390v3  [cs.RO]  25 Mar 2024
The fabrication process for the tendon-actuated soft grip-
per involves the insertion of tubes inside the soft fingers to
accommodate the passage of tendons [14], [15]. In contrast, a
pneumatic soft gripper requires only a sufficient air chamber
in each soft finger for bending [16]. Moreover, the location of
the tendon-actuated gripper is constrained by the position of
the driven motor. Nevertheless, soft pneumatic grippers offer
greater configurational flexibility due to the flexibility of the
air tube. The air tube can quickly connect the pneumatic
soft gripper with the pumps and valves. Related work also
explores the potential of pneumatic soft systems in aerial
grasping. Shtarbanov [17] developed FlowIO, a wearable
and modular pneumatic platform for soft robotics, which
showcased the viability of pneumatic systems in miniaturized
applications that are cost-effective for UA Vs engaged in
aerial grasping. Ping et al. [18] integrated a soft pneumatic
gripper beneath a conventional drone, similar to our design.
However, their focus does not explicitly revolve around
autonomous aerial grasping tasks or alleviating the need for
additional rigid landing gear. The soft gripper in their work is
controlled by a single command: pneumatic pressure. They
claim that the installation of the entire Grasping Unit has
minimal impact on the dynamics of the quadrotor. Since their
proposed soft gripper does not stick out by adding extra
degrees of freedom (DOF) to facilitate grasping, the rigid
landing gear of their UA V limits the grasping altitude. A 2
DOF robot arm with a pneumatic soft gripper is installed
under a traditional UA V with the rigid landing gear in
[19]. Compared to our proposed SA V , extra mechanisms
and control algorithms in the work of Sarkar et al. [19] are
needed to ensure the manipulator can reach its home and
pick positions. Also, their fixed, rigid landing gear increases
the net weight of the UA V , which is over 3 kg in total.
C. Contribution
The proposed SA V represents a significant advancement,
capable of aerial grasping and landing using a lightweight
modular soft pneumatic gripper. The pneumatic soft grip-
per, incorporating a feed-forward proportional controller for
precise pressure regulation, also serves the dual purpose
of functioning as a soft landing gear for the SA V during
deflation. This innovative design eliminates the need for
additional landing gear and allows the gripper to grasp
various objects by its two configurations, resulting in a
more streamlined and efficient aerial grasping system. Our
contributions are summarized as follows.
• Integrating modular connectors reduces the configura-
tion and fabrication time for the soft gripper fingers.
With just four fingers, the gripper can be arranged
into two configurations, providing a versatile range of
options for grasping target objects based on their shapes.
This modularity enhances the adaptability of the gripper
to grasp various objects during aerial operations.
• The dual capability of the soft gripper to serve as both
a grasping mechanism and a landing gear. The deflation
of the soft gripper enables it to function as a soft landing
gear, obviating the need for an additional rigid landing
Fig. 2: Dimensions of the X-base (spherical) soft gripper
when it is (a) initially opened, (b) fully opened, and (c) fully
closed. And the dimensions of the H-base (cylindrical) soft
gripper when it is (d) initially opened, (e) fully opened, and
(f) fully closed.
gear to reduce the weight of the SA V . This weight
reduction enhances flight efficiency and simplifies the
complexity associated with aerial operation control.
• The proposed lightweight, soft gripper with a traditional
quadrotor, which weighs merely 808 g (with its H-base
gripper), successfully grasps a cylindrical plastic con-
tainer weighing 217 g while in mid-air. This payload-
to-weight ratio surpasses those observed in previous
investigations [6], [18], [19].
II. MODULAR SOFT GRIPPER DESIGN
A. Mechanical Design
The proposed soft fingers exhibit dimensions of 100 mm
in length and 15 mm in width. These fingers can be affixed to
multiple bases at a 25 ◦ inclination angle, giving the gripper
increased grasping tolerance and diverse options for target
objects. Grasping tolerance refers to the available dimension
for grasping when the gripper is deflated, precisely the
distance between the fingertips when the gripper is fully
opened in Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(e), respectively. The diagonal
distance of the fully opened X-base (spherical) soft gripper
is 180 mm, while the tip-to-tip distance of the fully opened
H-base (cylindrical) soft gripper is 145 mm. The dimensions
of the 2 bases are shown in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(d). When
the complete closing of the soft gripper is undergoing, all
tips of the soft fingers of the X-base soft gripper touch each
other, while the tips of the two pairs of the 2-tip soft fingers
of the H-base counterpart touch each other too (see Fig. 2(c)
and Fig. 2(f)).
The X-base and H-base configurations necessitate using
four soft fingers to grasp target objects, as discussed in
prior works [18], [20]. Each finger of the soft gripper is
equipped with a single air chamber. These air chambers are
interconnected and equipped with one micro-pump and two
solenoid valves. The weights of the H-base and X-base soft
grippers are 106 g and 110 g (excluding the electronics),
respectively. The modular connectors of the soft fingers have
been designed to simplify the attachment of the soft fingers
to various bases. Sliding the connector and securing it with
Fig. 3: The exploded view (a) and assembly (b) of the mold
of the soft finger’s main body. The exploded view (c) and
assembly (d) of the mold of the soft finger’s cover. (e) The
side view of a soft gripper.
a screw allows each soft finger to connect to different bases
to grasp different objects quickly. This approach reduces
the required number of soft fingers to a maximum of four,
significantly reducing assembly time.
B. Fabrication
The soft fingers are molded using silicone rubber with
a proposed shore hardness of 30 A. For manufacturing
convenience, all the molds, soft finger connectors, and bases
are 3D-printed using Polylactic Acid (PLA). Fig. 3 illustrates
the mold design for a soft finger, which consists of two parts.
One part forms the main body of the soft finger, including
its air chamber, while the other part produces the cover of
the soft finger. This approach allows for efficient production
and assembly of the soft fingers.
Referring to [21], the main steps of the soft finger fabri-
cation include assembling the molds, applying mold release
spray, pouring liquid silicone rubber, cutting holes in the
covers, inserting and securing silicone tubes, and joining the
main body and covers using silicone gel. The silicone tubes
are not sealed by silicone gel, and they are only connected
with the tubing connector by friction to enable the quick
interchange between H-base and X-base.
Only the mold for making the air chamber is disposable
because it will be twisted and bent during removal from the
soft finger. The remaining parts of the mold can be reused
for future fabrication processes.
C. Electronics
The main electronic components of the soft gripper include
the microcontroller, air pump, solenoid valves, and pressure
sensor. Control of the gripper is managed by an ESP32-S3
microcontroller, which receives a Pulse-width Modulation
(PWM) signal from the flight controller for regulating the air
pump and valve operations. The soft gripper is equipped with
a single air pump that facilitates both inflation and deflation,
while two valves serve as switches to control the airflow
for inflation or deflation simultaneously. The air pump has
a pressure range of [-60, 120] kPa, and a pressure sensor
Fig. 4: The exploded CAD view of the soft gripper (including
weight information).
Fig. 5: Airflow system of the soft gripper when (a) the valve
operation for inflation turns on; (b) the valve operation for
deflation turns on.
with a range of [-100, 300] kPa is incorporated to detect
the internal airflow pressure within the gripper and provide
feedback to the microcontroller. To meet all the requirements
of the proposed soft gripper, except for the air pump and the
valves, all the electronic components are integrated onto a
customized Printed Circuit Board (PCB), as shown in Fig.
4. The total weight of the electronic components is 146 g.
In order to enhance the efficiency of the SA V by reducing
its overall weight, the soft gripper does not require an
additional power source when installed beneath a traditional
quadrotor. This minimizes energy requirements, enabling the
soft gripper to operate efficiently with the existing quadrotor
power system. Hence, the payload capacity of the SA V can
be maximized.
III. MODULAR SOFT GRIPPER CONTROL
A. Airflow Control System
As the soft drone approaches the target object, a deflation
command is transmitted from the ground control station
to the flight controller and subsequently to the ESP32-S3
microcontroller. This command activates the deflation airflow
through the valves and initiates vacuuming with the air pump.
Fig. 6: Block diagram of feed-forward proportional control
for the soft gripper.
The deflation process allows the soft gripper to open, release,
and land, while the inflation process activates the grasping of
the gripper by complete closing. During grasping, deflation
continues until an inflation command is received, triggering
the gripper to close. Inflation follows a similar procedure to
deflation. The microcontroller receives three ranges of PWM
inputs to control the behavior of the soft gripper: staying
at rest, inflation, and deflation. The airflow patterns during
inflation and deflation are depicted in Fig. 5. Both valves
are turned off to prevent airflow when the gripper is initially
opened. Only the relevant valve is activated during inflation
or deflation, while the other valve remains off to ensure
proper airflow direction. In Fig. 5, the blue solid block and
the red solid block of the air pump represent the inflation
and deflation function of the pump that is mainly used in
the relevant airflow, respectively. Also, the blue and the red
airflows indicate the inflation and the deflation airflows of
the gripper, respectively.
B. Pressure Regulation
The pressure regulation of the soft gripper employs a feed-
forward proportional control strategy, as presented in Fig.
6. This approach combines feed-forward and proportional
control techniques to enhance performance by anticipating
the impact of input pressure changes on the output pressure.
Due to the limited performance of the lightweight air pump
and the unseal soft gripper system, which enables easy
swapping between two configurations, a slight air leakage
can be predicted as a disturbance of the pressure regulation.
By integrating these control strategies, the gripper achieves
faster response times and improved stability in regulating
the air pump. Notably, the feed-forward proportional control
only sets the PWM signal for the air pump. At the same
time, the PWM command of the flight controller directly
determines the digital signals for activating the valves. This
valve control strategy prevents excessive vibration caused by
rapid changes in airflow direction.
The feed-forward proportional controller in Fig. 6 can be
computed by solving the following equations:
e(t) = r(t) − y(t) (1)
u(t) = Kp × e(t) + pmin (2)
Kp = pmax − pmin
r(t) (3)
fin = 0.8 (4)
fde = 1
r(t) (5)
TABLE I: Parameters in air pump regulation.
Variables Definitions
e(t) Pressure error in kPa
r(t) Set (desired) pressure
y(t) Current pressure
u(t) Output by Proportional controller
K p Proportional gain
pmax Max. PWM duty cycle of air pump (100%)
pmin Min. PWM duty cycle of air pump
(
86% if inflation
63% if deflation
fin Feed-forward component for inflation
fde Feed-forward component for deflation
g(t) Output by Feed-forward proportional controller
Fig. 7: Comparison between feed-forward proportional con-
troller and proportional controller of the soft gripper.
g(t) =
(
u(t) + fin × y(t) if inflation
u(t) + fde × y(t) if deflation (6)
where the minimum PWM duty cycle of the air pump,
pmin, is an adjustable parameter to optimize the performance
according to the desired pressure. If pmin is too low, the
response time of the system will be longer. The maximum
PWM duty cycle of the air pump, pmax, is fixed at the 8-bit
capacity of the microcontroller of the gripper. Referring to
the experimental results, we also observe the optimal feed-
forward component for inflation, fin, and deflation fde to
speed up the inflation and deflation time of the soft grip-
per. Further details and explanations of the abovementioned
variables can be found in Table I.
The soft gripper focuses on achieving maximum openness
and a secure grasp by pressure regulation. After considering
factors such as the air chamber capacity, inflation time,
performance of the lightweight air pump, and the results of
the feed-forward proportional controller, an inflation pressure
of 85 kPa was determined as optimal for achieving the
desired level of openness. Also, a deflation pressure of -25
kPa was chosen to ensure rapid and effective closure. We also
observe the optimal fin and fde to speed up the inflation and
deflation time of the soft gripper. The step response graph
in Fig. 7 illustrates the pressure regulation performance with
a set pressure signal (set pressure in 0 kPa, -25 kPa, and
+85 kPa) by the feed-forward proportional controller and the
proportional controller. Although the deflation performance
for both controllers is similar, the inflation time of the
feed-forward proportional controller is much faster than that
of the proportional controller. These results show that the
feed-forward component anticipates set pressure changes,
facilitating stable current pressure and reduced steady-state
error. Also, in the feed-forward proportional control, the
desired inflation pressure can be reached faster, compared
with the proportional control only, but the desired deflation
performance of both control methods differs insignificantly.
Note that the soft gripper starts closing at 58 kPa and takes
approximately 5 seconds to reach the proposed inflation
pressure from deflation.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experiment Implementation
1) Aerial Grasping Test: During the indoor autonomous
grasping tests performed with the proposed soft gripper
installed under a conventional drone (with an F330 airframe),
it is observed that the mass of the object being grasped
significantly influences the grasping process. Objects that
are too light (less than approximately 70 g) are susceptible
to being blown away by the airflow generated by the SA V
before aerial grasping. Therefore, using objects with a mass
greater than 70 g is recommended. In the aerial grasping
task, the target object was a water bottle (including loads)
weighing 75 g, while the proposed SA V weighed 808 g. The
water bottle was intentionally emptied to eliminate any non-
static mass caused by liquid flow during grasping. To prevent
the water bottle from being blown away by the airflow of the
SA V , additional loads were added to increase its weight.
The flight tests were conducted under a VICON mo-
tion capture system, which provided real-time ground truth
data to the ground station computer to assist the flight
controller in tracking the target item. The proposed SA V
uses a nonlinear model predictive controller (NMPC) [22],
[23] for minimizing tracking error and conducting aerial
grasping. Despite slight tracking errors during grasping, the
softness of the soft gripper compensated for them, offering
sufficient grasping tolerance. Thus, the water bottle was
securely grasped without being damaged. The flight test aims
to demonstrate the aerial grasping ability of the proposed
modular pneumatic soft gripper, so the tracking error due to
the change in the dynamic model of the SA V after grasping
is beyond the scope of this paper and neglected. This paper
does not include the details of the NMPC for the SA V , as
our focus is on highlighting the contributions of the modular
pneumatic soft gripper in aerial grasping.
2) Static Grasping Test: To further evaluate the grasping
performance of the SA V , a static grasping test aimed to assess
both the maximum load capacity of the soft gripper and its
ability to grasp objects with various base shapes. The test
involved evaluating the performance of the gripper under
different load conditions and its ability to grasp objects with
diverse base configurations securely.
Fig. 8: Tested Object Set: (a) Pen Holder with Loads, (b)
Computer Mouse, (c) Double-sided Tape, (d) Pen, (e) Spray
Paint, (f) Syringe, (g) Membership Card, (h) Pocket Tissue
Paper, (i) Spherical Container with Loads, (j) Plastic Box.
In this experiment, the SA V was put on an aluminum rack,
and the servo tester provided the inflation or deflation PWM
input signal to the microcontroller of the gripper, making
it independent of the drone system without receiving inputs
from the flight controller or ground control station. Target
objects were manually placed under the center of the gripper
by human hands. To test the grasping tolerance of the gripper,
the positions of the centroid of the objects did not require
a precise alignment of the centroid of the gripper before
grasping. 10 graspings were conducted for each specimen.
The 10 objects in the grasping test are shown in Fig. 8.
Successful grasping trials required the gripper to hold the
target object for at least 30 seconds. To ensure a reliable
grip, human hands intentionally moved and gently shook the
SA V during the test.
3) Soft Landing Test: The soft gripper establishes its
landing ability by keeping a full opening as a soft landing
gear to stabilize the pose of the SA V and dampen the impact
forces during landing. The proposed soft gripper replacing
the rigid landing gear can increase the efficiency of the
aerial manipulation of the SA V without burdening its payload
capability. To assess the landing ability of the SA V , the SA V
first conducted a simple landing test, which requested the
SA V to land on the ground. Then, the tilt landing test of
the SA V was also handled by landing it on a slope with 10 ◦
inclined angles.
4) Payload Test of the SAV: The maximum payload of
the SA V with two configurations of its soft gripper was
discovered by grasping different objects while hovering. To
focus on the payload capability, the aerial grasping ability
of the SA V was ignored in this test by grasping the target
items before taking off.
B. Results and Discussion
1) Soft Grasping Performance: Figure 9 illustrates a
successful aerial grasping demonstration performed by the
proposed H-base soft gripper. Despite minor tracking errors
causing the SA V to miss the desired grasping position of the
empty water bottle, the inherent softness of the soft gripper
allows it to compensate for such errors and provide ample
grasping tolerance. As a result, the bottle could be securely
grasped without sustaining any damage.
Fig. 9: Aerial grasping process with the H-base soft gripper:
(a) Approaching the target, (b) Starting grasping, (c) Picking
up the object.
Fig. 10: Grasping success rate results of 2 configurations.
*The X-base gripper can hang and wrap the tape, while the
H-base gripper always wraps the tape.
From Fig. 10, the soft gripper with both two configurations
can grasp the pen holder and the pocket tissue paper with a
100% success rate. The 4-tip soft gripper with an H-base is
designed for grasping cylindrical objects and offers increased
gripping force through the wrapping motion of its two pairs
of 2-tip fingers. The H-base gripper can grasp cylindrical
objects up to 200 g with a 100% success rate, but it has
an 80% success rate for grasping a can of spray paint due
to the non-static center of gravity. It cannot handle items
more miniature than the distance between its finger pairs,
so it is less effective with spherical objects. To address these
limitations, a proposed X-base allows all four fingers to align
with the centroid of objects to grasp spherical items. It can
also grasp the pen holder with loads up to 330 g because one
of the soft fingers can hang the pen holder with the support of
the other three soft fingers. Nonetheless, the X-base does not
provide the same wrapping force for cylindrical objects as
the H-base. Thus, X-base and H-base serve distinct purposes.
Some examples of this static grasping test are illustrated in
Fig. 11.
2) Soft Landing Performance: In Fig. 12(a) and Fig.
12(b), with the modular soft gripper, this novel SA V can take
off and land on the ground without the need for traditional
rigid landing gear. Since the landing pressure is equivalent to
the deflation pressure used during grasping, the soft gripper
can remain fully opened, serving as a landing gear to stabilize
the pose of the SA V during takeoff and effectively dampen
impact forces upon landing. Besides, Fig. 12(c) and Fig.
Fig. 11: Examples of grasping tests: Grasping (a) a pen
holder with 270 g loads and (b) a spherical container with
160 g loads by an X-base gripper; Grasping (c) a computer
mouse and (d) a can of spray paint with an H-base gripper.
Fig. 12: Simple landing test with (a) the H-base soft gripper
and (b) the X-base soft gripper, and tilt landing test with the
(c) X-base and (d) H-base soft gripper.
12(d) present the successful tilt landing of the SA V (with
its two configurations of the soft gripper) on a 10 ◦ inclined
platform. According to Table II, the H-base soft gripper
performs better for the tilt landing as it can always be
flattened, while the X-base soft gripper sometimes may only
have three fingers to be flattened and even jump out from the
platform due to the impact forces. These tilt landing results
show that the H-base soft gripper can dampen the impact
forces of the soft fingers more since the fingers have more
contact areas with the tilt platform. Thus, the modular soft
gripper can successfully replace conventional rigid landing
gear, even for tilt landing.
3) Payload Ability Performance: In Fig. 13, the SA V
demonstrates its successful grasping of a 217 g double-
sided tape using the X-base soft gripper and a 217 g
plastic cylindrical container using the H-base soft gripper.
Both payload tests were conducted for over 30 seconds.
This payload ability is higher than those in some previous
research, such as 106 g foam target in [6], 100 g payload in
TABLE II: Comparison of SA V landing performance on
ground and tilt platform.
Configurations Successes (ground) Successes (tilt)
X-base 10/10(100%) 6/10(60%)
H-base 10/10(100%) 10/10(100%)
Fig. 13: Payload test of the SA V with the X-base (a) and (b)
H-base soft gripper.
[18], and 150 g packet in [19]. The focus of this test was
to evaluate the payload capacity of the SA V , with the aerial
grasping capability intentionally excluded.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented the design and control of a modular
pneumatic soft gripper equipped under a traditional quadrotor
(556 g) as a novel SA V for autonomous aerial grasping tasks
and landing. The main objective of this soft gripper design
is to maintain a lightweight structure, thereby minimizing
the impact on the flight capabilities of the SA V . Therefore,
the proposed modular pneumatic soft gripper weighs less
than 260 g. Pressure control for the modular gripper utilizes
a feed-forward proportional controller to improve pressure
regulation. Experimental results from grasping tests reveal
that the total contact areas of the gripper on the target object
influence the grasping force. To accommodate objects of
different shapes, we have explored two base configurations
for the modular soft gripper. The H-base 4-tip gripper is
suitable for cylindrical or rectangular objects, while the
X-base 4-tip gripper is more appropriate for spherical or
rounded objects.
This paper also demonstrates a successful indoor au-
tonomous aerial grasping task. The SA V can grasp a 217 g
payload in mid-air, which signifies a satisfactory payload-
to-weight ratio. Furthermore, the soft gripper efficiently
replaces rigid landing gear, facilitating competent landings
on both the ground and a 10 ◦ inclined platform. These
findings contribute to developing autonomous aerial grasping
capabilities in soft robotic systems. We also discover two
future challenges, including adapting to the dynamic model
changes after grasping and enhancing the grasping ability on
thin and small objects.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Meng, J. Buzzatto, Y . Liu, and M. Liarokapis, “On aerial robots
with grasping and perching capabilities: A comprehensive review,”
Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 8, p. 739173, 2022.
[2] G. Muchiri and S. Kimathi, “A review of applications and potential
applications of uav,” in Proceedings of the Sustainable Research and
Innovation Conference, 2022, pp. 280–283.
[3] S. Yeong, L. King, and S. Dol, “A review on marine search and rescue
operations using unmanned aerial vehicles,” International Journal of
Marine and Environmental Sciences, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 396–399, 2015.
[4] J. Qi, J. Kang, and X. Lu, “Design and research of uav autonomous
grasping system,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Un-
manned Systems (ICUS) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 126–131.
[5] C. A. Thiels, J. M. Aho, S. P. Zietlow, and D. H. Jenkins, “Use of
unmanned aerial vehicles for medical product transport,” Air medical
journal, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 104–108, 2015.
[6] J. Fishman, S. Ubellacker, N. Hughes, and L. Carlone, “Dynamic
grasping with a” soft” drone: From theory to practice,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 4214–4221.
[7] Y . Zhu, X. He, P. Zhang, G. Guo, and X. Zhang, “Perching and
grasping mechanism inspired by a bird’s claw,” Machines, vol. 10,
no. 8, p. 656, 2022.
[8] D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, “Design, fabrication and control of soft
robots,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 467–475, 2015.
[9] J. P. King, D. Bauer, C. Schlagenhauf, K.-H. Chang, D. Moro,
N. Pollard, and S. Coros, “Design. fabrication, and evaluation of
tendon-driven multi-fingered foam hands,” in 2018 IEEE-RAS 18th
International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) . IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–9.
[10] M. Manti, T. Hassan, G. Passetti, N. D’Elia, C. Laschi, and
M. Cianchetti, “A bioinspired soft robotic gripper for adaptable and
effective grasping,” Soft Robotics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 107–116, 2015.
[11] T. Hassan, M. Manti, G. Passetti, N. d’Elia, M. Cianchetti, and
C. Laschi, “Design and development of a bio-inspired, under-actuated
soft gripper,” in 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) . IEEE,
2015, pp. 3619–3622.
[12] P. Ramon-Soria, A. E. Gomez-Tamm, F. J. Garcia-Rubiales, B. C.
Arrue, and A. Ollero, “Autonomous landing on pipes using soft gripper
for inspection and maintenance in outdoor environments,” in 2019
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 5832–5839.
[13] J. Fishman and L. Carlone, “Control and trajectory optimization
for soft aerial manipulation,” in 2021 IEEE Aerospace Conference
(50100). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–17.
[14] R. Peng, Z. Wang, and P. Lu, “Aecom: An aerial continuum manipula-
tor with precise kinematic modeling for variable loading and tendon-
slacking prevention,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14180 , 2021.
[15] J. L. Chien, C. Leong, J. Liu, and S. Foong, “Design and control of
an aerial-ground tethered tendon-driven continuum robot with hybrid
routing,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 161, p. 104344,
2023.
[16] T. S. Y . Min, L. Y . Lee, and S. G. Nurzaman, “Bayesian optimization
of pneumatic soft grippers via reconfigurable modular molds,” in 2023
IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) . IEEE,
2023, pp. 1–6.
[17] A. Shtarbanov, “Flowio development platform–the pneumatic “rasp-
berry pi” for soft robotics,” in Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems , 2021, pp. 1–6.
[18] J. T. Ping, B. H. Khoo, O. A. Syadiqeen, N. Khoo, C. P. Tan, and S. G.
Nurzaman, “Aerial grasping by a quadrotor uav with a soft material
gripper.”
[19] D. Sarkar, A. Arora, S. Sen, S. S. Katta, D. Shashank, M. Rohan,
and S. Saha, “Development of an autonomous uav integrated with
a manipulator and a soft gripper,” in 2022 13th Asian Control
Conference (ASCC). IEEE, 2022, pp. 2212–2217.
[20] C. Tawk, R. Mutlu, and G. Alici, “A 3d printed modular soft gripper
integrated with metamaterials for conformal grasping,” Frontiers in
Robotics and AI , vol. 8, p. 799230, 2022.
[21] J. Zhang, A. Jackson, N. Mentzer, and R. Kramer, “A modular, recon-
figurable mold for a soft robotic gripper design activity,” Frontiers in
Robotics and AI , vol. 4, p. 46, 2017.
[22] B. Jiang, B. Li, W. Zhou, L.-Y . Lo, C.-K. Chen, and C.-Y . Wen,
“Neural network based model predictive control for a quadrotor uav,”
Aerospace, vol. 9, no. 8, p. 460, 2022.
[23] B. Li, W. Zhou, J. Sun, C.-Y . Wen, and C.-K. Chen, “Development of
model predictive controller for a tail-sitter vtol uav in hover flight,”
Sensors, vol. 18, no. 9, p. 2859, 2018.