2110 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, APRIL 2023
A High-Strength, Highly-Flexible Robotic Strap for
Harnessing, Lifting, and Transferring Humans
Kentaro Barhydt , Graduate Student Member , IEEE, and H. Harry Asada , Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Safely harnessing and lifting humans for transfer is
a challenging unsolved problem for current robots because of
the high forces and gentle interaction necessary to do so. Straps,
however, are highly beneﬁcial for manually performing this task
primarily because of their simultaneously high tensile strength and
high compliant bending ﬂexibility. We propose the Robotic Strap,
a novel concept and design for a new type of manipulator that can
passively harness and lift humans safely as straps can, as well as
actively articulate itself around the human into the desired harness-
ing conﬁgurations. The passive structure is characterized by the
high tensile strength and bending ﬂexibility of straps. The design
consists of a hyper-articulated backbone with rolling-contact joints
fastened by dual-pulley cord mechanisms, and soft thin McKibben
artiﬁcial muscles embedded along its length that collectively actuate
the joints. We present the concept, framework, realization, and
implementation of the Robotic Strap design, as well as model and
experimentally validate the key characteristics. The prototype has
a tensile load capacity of 1314.0 N, a maximum joint bending
resistance of < 0.1 Nm, and successfully demonstrated safe and
effective harnessing and lifting of three human participants without
any manual intervention.
Index Terms—Soft robot materials and design, compliant joints
and mechanisms, soft robot applications, mechanism design,
robotic straps.
I. I NTRODUCTION
G
ENTL Y holding, lifting, and transferring the entire hu-
man body with a robotic system remains a challenging
problem, despite extensive research and development efforts.
Humans are heavy, delicate, deformable, and vary widely in
shape and pose. Standard robotic manipulators and end-effectors
cannot achieve sufﬁciently gentle human interaction while ap-
plying the high forces needed to lift the body effectively, al-
though many high impact tasks depend on this functionality. In
eldercare and care of people with physical disabilities, lifting
humans is a necessary task regularly carried out by caregivers,
Manuscript received 16 September 2022; accepted 31 January 2023. Date of
publication 17 February 2023; date of current version 28 February 2023. This
letter was recommended for publication by Associate Editor G. Krishnan and
Editor Y .-L. Park upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was
supported by NSK, Ltd. (Corresponding author: Kentaro Barhydt.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval
of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee on the Use of Humans as
Experimental Subjects under Application No. 2206000693, and performed in
line with the Helsinki.
The authors are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts 02139 USA (e-mail:
kbarhydt@mit.edu; asada@mit.edu).
This letter has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2023.3246389, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2023.3246389
Fig. 1. Robotic Strap manipulator, shown: (a) passively hanging downward
when idle, (b) bending upward when active, (c) passively complying to and
bearing the full weight of a human, and (d) automatically extending from a
drum, articulating around a human, and latching its tip to harness them in a
closed-loop conﬁguration (similar to a seat belt).
which is both strenuous and fatiguing on their bodies. This task is
also critical for emergency medical response, search and rescue,
occupational therapy, ergonomic support for manual labor, and
so forth.
The current standard practice in eldercare is for caregivers
to manually attach a harness to the patient or wrap their body
with straps to securely harness and lift them [1]. Straps are
used because they are practical for high-force human interaction.
They can be wrapped around any human in nearly any harnessing
conﬁguration to distribute the high load over a large contact area.
This is enabled primarily by their simultaneously high tensile
strength and bending ﬂexibility. However, manual handling by
a human is required to attach straps in the appropriate conﬁgura-
tions, which is a major bottleneck preventing fully autonomous
human lifting and transferring with robotic systems.
The only robots that have demonstrated safe lifting of a hu-
man’s full body weight for transfer are the RIBA robots, a series
of mobile robots with two 2-link arms and high-torque motors
(> 1000 gear ratios) [2], and the Toyota Patient Transfer Assist
robot, a mobile robot with a shifting weight-supporting platform
that patients lie on [3]. However, these works do not address
the secure harnessing problem. Soft robots have been shown to
be advantageous for safe and versatile human interaction due to
the compliance of their structures [4], [5], [6], [7]. The Big-hand
gripper, a human-scale pneumatic gripper, has demonstrated safe
grasping of a human and assistance of a sit-to-stand transition
[8]. However, it has not demonstrated the ability to lift the full
weight of a human, and has only demonstrated assisted lifting
with the load fully supported by its metal frame, concentrated en-
tirely onto small contact areas under the subject’s armpits. Vine
robots are the closest example to an existing “strap-like” robot
2377-3766 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BARHYDT AND ASADA: HIGH-STRENGTH, HIGHL Y -FLEXIBLE ROBOTIC STRAP FOR HARNESSING, LIFTING, AND TRANSFERRING HUMANS 2111
given their lightweight, compact, ﬂexible, highly-extendable,
and steerable bodies [9]. However, fully soft designs are limited
in their tensile load bearing capacity. Vine robots require a tip
mount device to retract without buckling, which limits its tensile
load capacity to 7 kg and prevents it from articulating above the
ground [10], [11]. To the best of our knowledge, the OctArm V
currently holds the record for the highest tensile load capacity
demonstrated by a multi-DOF soft-robotic manipulator [12].
The maximum load capacity of the entire manipulator is 22.43 kg
(220 N), at which point it can only hold and cannot pull the load.
In this letter, we present a novel concept and design for a
Robotic Strap-like manipulator that can be actively extended,
articulate itself around the human into the desired harnessing
conﬁgurations, and be actively retracted to safely secure, lift, and
suspend them above the ground. The Robotic Strap is primarily
characterized by (1) the simultaneously high passive tensile
strength and bending ﬂexibility inherent to straps, and (2) active
articulation capabilities for versatile harnessing of humans. We
also present models for the key characteristics of this design
concept, an implementation of a full Robotic Strap manipulator,
experimental validations of the models, and demonstrations of
automatic and safe harnessing and lifting of humans.
II. R OBOTIC STRAP
A. Robotic Strap Concept
The Robotic Strap design concept is of a manipulator with
an actuated ‘strap-like’ structure that can articulate itself when
active and maintain the passive strap-like behavior when idle.
We consider a manipulator structure to be ‘strap-like’ if it is
characterized by the fundamental physical characteristics inher-
ent to passive straps that make them beneﬁcial for harnessing and
lifting humans, which are their high tensile strength and high
bending ﬂexibility. We consider a strap-like manipulator to be
“robotic” if it can automatically extend and articulate itself
around the body into the desired harnessing conﬁgurations. The
tensile strength is considered sufﬁcient if the passive structure
can suspend loads signiﬁcantly larger than the full weight of an
average adult. The bending ﬂexibility is considered sufﬁcient
if the passive structure (1) can compliantly conform to the
body and sufﬁciently distribute the load along its length to
minimize the applied pressure, and (2) has a large enough passive
conﬁguration space to enable signiﬁcantly varied harnessing
conﬁgurations for people of different shapes and poses. In this
work, bending ﬂexibility is measured in terms of the structure’s
passive bending resolution, resistance, and range of motion (i.e.
curvature), as detailed in Section III.
B. Minimal Design Framework
In order to address key design issues, a simpliﬁed model is
considered, as shown in Fig. 3. It consists of a serial chain
backbone with zero-stiffness, minimal-friction rigid joints. As is
typical for rigid hardware, the links and joints have a high tensile
strength, and the joints can be easily designed to have large pas-
sive bending ranges of motion. The serial chain is actively bent
by linearly contracting artiﬁcial muscle actuators. As detailed
later, thin McKibben muscles can meet the requirements of this
application [5]. The actuators are embedded along the chain so
that a single contracting actuator simultaneously bends every
link it is anchored to.
Fig. 2. Passive straps (left) are highly practical for manually harnessing and
lifting humans safely because of their high tensile strength and high bending
ﬂexibility. The Robotic Strap (right) has a ’strap-like’ structure with these same
passive properties and their associated beneﬁts while also being able to actively
articulate itself around the human for automatic harnessing. The Robotic Strap
shown has three independent active planar bending segments and can be extended
from and retracted into an active drum to achieve various desired harnessing
conﬁgurations.
Fig. 3. Schematic of a naive design representing the minimal set of features
of the design framework.
This chain structure resembles the hyper-articulated and con-
tinuum manipulators studied extensively since the 70’s [13],
[14], [15], [16]. However, its functional requirements as a
Robotic Strap are signiﬁcantly different from those existing
designs. First, the hyper-articulated robots are actuated with rel-
atively heavy gearmotors that are not backdriveable and require
large torques. This non-backdriveable property is uncharacter-
istic to passive straps that are completely ﬂexible. The artiﬁcial
muscle actuators used for the Robotic Strap are assumed to be
thin enough to buckle under minimal compressive forces and
thus add minimal bending resistance to the joints. Thus, the
structure is completely backdriveable.
Furthermore, the Robotic Strap differs from existing designs
in a few other critical points, posing a different set of functional
requirements. Cable-drive mechanisms have been widely used in
hyper-articulated and continuum manipulators. Cables transmit
forces generated by actuators placed at a base to individual
joints, offsetting the actuator masses from the manipulator’s
body. However, they create opposing tensile/compressive forces
along the backbone, which affects its posture unless the tensile
forces are supported by the backbone structure along the trans-
mission line. Strap-like structures have no bending stiffness,
and thus will buckle under any compressive forces applied by
these transmissions, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a). Therefore, a
fundamental guideline for the Robotic Strap design is obtained:
the structural segment between any two adjacent points
where compressive forces are applied must act as a single
rigid joint. Thus, the design framework employs a serial chain
backbone with discrete rigid joints, making it possible to bend
the structure with compressive forces without buckling as long as
the forces are applied only between directly adjacent links. This
allows the backbone to simultaneously satisfy the contradicting
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2112 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, APRIL 2023
Fig. 4. (a) Backbone buckling schematic, (b) backbone collapsing schematic,
(c) fully determined active structure schematic.
requirements of having minimal passive bending resistance and
a fully determined articulating structure (not prone to buckling).
The second contradiction is between high bending ﬂexibility
and the common practice of designing speciﬁc bending stiffness
behaviors into the backbone to statically determine its structure
with relatively few actuators. Without this stiffness, moments
applied at a few points would not distribute over the rest of
the backbone, causing it to collapse as illustrated in Fig. 4(b).
Thus, separate transmissions would need to directly actuate
every DOF, limiting the feasible passive bending resolution. To
address this, another fundamental guideline is established: each
actuator/transmission must directly attach to and simulta-
neously bend every point along its corresponding backbone
segment. This is accomplished by the uniformly contracting
artiﬁcial muscles embedded along the backbone, as illustrated
in Fig. 4(c). The single actuator determines the bending angle
of every joint it is attached to, and thus the number of passive
bending DOFs can theoretically be inﬁnitely scaled up without
increasing the number of required actuators. This allows the
design to satisfy the key characteristic of high bending ﬂexibility
in terms of both the minimal bending stiffness and high passive
bending resolution requirements, while remaining fully deter-
mined without needing to directly actuate each passive DOF
individually.
The use of artiﬁcial muscles also addresses another fundamen-
tal contradiction between the key characteristic of sufﬁciently
high active bending resolution and the traditional method of in-
creasing active DOFs by adding more actuators, which increases
weight and size. Artiﬁcial muscles can be split into multiple
muscles without adding new material (except for additional
power/pressure lines), enabling scalable active DOFs limited
only by the number of passive DOFs of the backbone. Addi-
tionally, the artiﬁcial muscles are assumed to be light enough to
avoid signiﬁcantly weighing down the backbone, enabling them
to actuate sufﬁciently large active ranges of motion (as detailed
later).
While this design framework conceptually satisﬁes all of the
key characteristics, a naive design informed by this framework
(e.g. Fig. 3) does not address important technical requirements
necessary to ensure it can actually feasibly achieve the de-
sired functionality. All of these technical challenges must be
addressed while maintaining the key characteristics to realize
a design that can fulﬁll the Robotic Strap concept for safely
harnessing and lifting humans.
C. Full Design Concept
The Robotic Strap concept was fully realized as a feasible
manipulator design that can automatically harness and lift hu-
mans safely by building on the minimal design framework with
Fig. 5. Full design concept for Robotic Strap manipulator. Top: Segment of
six joints. Bottom-left: Cord loops of dual-pulley fastening mechanism. Bottom-
right: Interlocking grooves.
further mechanisms and design decisions to address key tech-
nical challenges. The full design consists of a hyper-articulated
backbone with rolling-contact joints held together using a dual-
pulley fastening mechanism, and a series of soft pneumatic thin
McKibben muscles embedded along the side.
The backbone design uses hollow rolling-contact joints in-
stead of traditional links with pin joints because of their beneﬁts
for weight and safe human contact. As shown in Fig. 5, rolling-
contact joints only require the joint structure and a fastening
mechanism to form the desired planar serial-chain backbone
with no bending stiffness. The round geometry also creates
a larger, safer contact area with the human than the pronged
surface of the naive backbone link design.
The dual-pulley fastening mechanism consists of two sets of
inner and outer pulleys, as shown in Fig. 5. The outer-pulley
cords shown in blue in the ﬁgure tie together adjacent outer-
pulleys with the sash-like arrangement of a cord so that the
pulleys may not slip. They prevent the rolling contact joints from
sheering in the bending plane, and also prevent torsion about the
tensile axis. The inner-pulley cords shown in green in the ﬁgure
provide a high tensile strength resisting the joints from being
pulled apart due to their mechanical advantage in that direction.
The two inner-pulleys sets are also located near the opposite
ends of the joints, and thus constrain the joints from bending
about the axis orthogonal to the desired bending and tensile axes.
The interlocking grooves are held together by the tensile force
of the inner-pulley cords, and prevent the joints from sheering
along the bending axis. This dual-pulley mechanism with the
fastening cords enables the use of rolling-joints in the back-
bone design while maintaining the necessary tensile strength
and achieving the out-of-plane deﬂection resistance necessary
for fully-determined active bending capabilities. The cords are
assumed to have a high tensile strength and negligible bending
stiffness. Combined with the interlocking grooves between the
joints (Fig. 5), this cord fastening mechanism allows for minimal
bending resistance between joints in the desired 2D bending
plane and rigidly constrains all other translational/rotational
DOFs.
The use thin McKibben actuators embedded into the rolling-
contact joints with a dual-pulley joint fastening mechanism
meets the key technical requirements. McKibben actuators are
a type of pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle with an inﬂatable inner
tubing and an outer ﬁber mesh that contracts its length as its
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BARHYDT AND ASADA: HIGH-STRENGTH, HIGHL Y -FLEXIBLE ROBOTIC STRAP FOR HARNESSING, LIFTING, AND TRANSFERRING HUMANS 2113
Fig. 6. Dual-pulley fastening mechanism inner pulley diagram with the asso-
ciated tensile forces.
volume expands, and are characterized by their high force-to-
weight ratios. Thin McKibben actuators [5] are characterized by
their small diameter and resulting high bending ﬂexibility while
maintaining high force and contraction performance. The joints
can be mounted to arbitrary points along its body as well, as
explained in Section IV -A, making them ideal for the Robotic
Strap design. Their negligibly light weight also allows them to be
mounted directly onto the backbone without weighing it down
signiﬁcantly, which contributes to addressing the ﬁrst and third
technical challenges.
III. M ODELING
In this section, we deﬁne the relationships between the funda-
mental metrics underlying the key characteristics of the Robotic
Strap and their relevant design parameters.
A. Tensile Strength
The tensile strength of the Robotic Strap is measured as the
maximum tensile load it can hold. The dual-pulley fastening
mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 6, where αis the angle be-
tween the cords and the neutral line, and Rip and R denote
the inner pulley and joint radii, respectively. From the ﬁgure,
sinα= Rip/R. The joints are assumed to be rigid, and changes
in the tensile strength of the cord due to bends and knots
are assumed negligible. The tensile strength of the dual-pulley
fastening mechanism Tmax is given by
Tmax =2 NpulleyTmax,cord
√
R2 −R2
ip
R (1)
where Npulley =2 is the number of inner pulleys per single
joint, and Tmax,cord is the tensile load capacity of cord.
B. Passive Bending Resolution, Curvature, and Resistance
We consider three metrics to quantify this bending ﬂexibility
performance: passive bending resolution, curvature (i.e. range
of motion), and resistance. The passive bending resolution is
deﬁned as the number of passive bending DOFs within a unit
length of the backbone, given as
ζ=( 2R)−1. (2)
For large joint diameters, the resolution is low, and the strap does
not conform to small and complex geometric surface features.
For small joint diameters, the resolution is high, and the strap
can closely conform to small and complex geometric surface
features, increase the contact area, and distribute force more
uniformly.
Fig. 7. Left: Backbone bending curvature diagram. Right: Kinematic diagram
for joint bending angle given contracted actuator length.
The maximum passive bending curvature is also critical for
characterizing bending ﬂexibility because it determines how
small and complex of surface features the structure can conform
to. The bending kinematics of of the Robotic Strap and a pair
of fastened joints with an idle artiﬁcial muscle are illustrated
in Fig. 7, where l is the actuator length, RC is the radius of
curvature,θis the angle a joint bends away from the neutral line
AB (angle between joint frames is 2θ), and κis the curvature.
The actuator length l is kinematically dependent on θgiven as
l =2 R(1−sinθ) (3)
The actuator contraction ratio deﬁned below is then related to
the joint angle as ε=( l0 −l)/l0 =s i nθ. From the ﬁgure, we
ﬁnd that triangles CAB and CDE are similar. Therefore,
l
2R = Rc −R
Rc
(4)
Solving this for Rc we can ﬁnd the curvature κas
κ= 1
Rc
= sinθ
R = ε
R (5)
Thus, for contraction actuators (0 <l ≤2R),κ=0 whenε=0
(l =2 R) andκ= R−1 whenε=1 (l =0 ). Given the minimum
idle actuator compressed length lmin,p, the maximum curvature
can be deﬁned as
κmax = 2R−lmin,p
2R2 = εmax,p
R . (6)
The design parameters relevant to the maximum passive bending
curvature are therefore R and lmin,p. Given that idle McK-
ibben actuators buckle and fold when compressed, lmin,p can
be assumed to be roughly equal to the thickness of two ﬂat-
tened actuators pressed against each other, approximated as
lmin,p ≈2(2(ttubing +tmesh)) wheret denotes wall thickness.
The passive bending resistance is the reaction moment exerted
by a joint with idle actuators when bent. The Robotic Strap
must compliantly bend under sufﬁciently low applied moments
in order to conform to the body without generating high reaction
forces that can concentrate the load around high curvature
surface features. Idle thin McKibben muscles easily buckle
under low compression forces, and thus they are completely
backdriveable and minimally contribute to bending resistance.
A diagram relating the joint bending momentMb to the actuator
compressive reaction force is shown in Fig. 8(a). This relation-
ship can be derived as
Mb = Nafs(l)rm = Nafs(l)R cos(θ) (7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2114 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, APRIL 2023
Fig. 8. (a) Passive bending resistance diagram relating reaction moment to
bending angle. (b) Schematic of the most demanding conﬁguration possible
given the conﬁguration parameters RC and Lh. (c) Simple conﬁguration for
surrounding the subject to lift vertically, parameterized by RC andLh.
where Na is the number of actuators embedded along the
backbone in parallel, and fs(l) is an experimentally determined
function relating the actuator’s compressive reaction force to
its length. Since different actuator mount designs may apply
different bending moments to the actuators as the joints rotate,
we assume that fs(l) describes an actuator in pure compression
(moments applied by the mounts are negligible) to ensure that 7
provides a worst-case upper-bound estimate of Mb for a given
θ. Note that l is a function of θ(3), thus fs(l) is a function of
θ. Given this model,R,fs(l), andNa are the design parameters
relevant to the passive bending resistance.
It is important to note that, in (7),Mb will accurately change
with respect to changes in all the parameters except for R,
because physically altering R will also alter the experimentally
determined force-compression curvefs(l). Therefore, while (7)
implies that Mb increases as R increases, the opposite can
be concluded by modeling the actuator as a buckling column
with ﬁxed ends. The maximum compression force of a column
is its buckling force, which is given by Euler’s column for-
mula, fs,max = Fbuckle = 4π2EI
l2
0
. Thus Mb,max ∝Nal−2
0 R =
Na(2R)−2R = Na
4 R−1, and therefore
Mb,max ∝R−1. (8)
C. Actuator Requirements for Active Range of Motion
The bending actuation requirements for the desired range of
motion are deﬁned as the maximum moment and angle the joints
must achieve in order to reach the most demanding desired
open-loop conﬁgurations. The Robotic Strap must be able to ac-
tively assume desired open-loop conﬁgurations that surround the
human body before latching its tip to close the loop and tighten
itself around the body. We assume no external contacts/forces
are utilized to achieve these conﬁgurations. Fig. 8(c) shows a
simple vertical conﬁguration for surrounding a body part before
harnessing and lifting, parameterized by the minimum number
of geometric parameters (curvature radius RC and hanging
length Lh) necessary to fully deﬁne the desired active range of
motion in terms of the manipulator DOFs (curvatureκ= RC
−1
and full extended length from the base Lext =2 Lh +πRC ).
For simplicity, the curvature of the bent segment is assumed to
be constant. Fig. 8(b) shows the most demanding conﬁguration
possible given the same values for κandLext, in that it applies
the highest possible moment to the most proximal joint in the
curved segment and still requires it achieve the same angle.
The moment applied onto the most proximal joint (joint 0) by
the extended structure can be given by
N∑
i=1
M 0
i =2 Rg
N∑
i=1
⎡
⎣mi
i∑
j=1
sin
( j∑
k=i
θk
) ⎤
⎦ (9)
where θk is the bending angle between joint k and joint k −1,
M 0
i is the moment that joint i individually contributes to the
total moment experienced by joint 0, mi is the mass of joint i
(including the associated actuator segment length), and N is the
total number of joints distal to joint 0 in the serial chain. Given
the assumed constant curvature of the bending section,θk is also
assumed constant for allk =1 ...N C , whereNC is the number
of joints in the curved segment. Therefore, we deﬁne θk = θC
for allk =1 ...N C andθk =0 f o ra l lf o ra l lk = NC +1 ...N ,
and can express θC as sinθC =2 R/RC .
The moment that the curved segment exerts onto joint 0 is
given in terms of the design and conﬁguration parameters as
NC∑
i=1
M 0
i =2 Rg
NC∑
i=1
⎡
⎣mi
i∑
j=1
sin
(
j · sin−1
( R
Rc
)) ⎤
⎦. (10)
The moment exerted by the straight cantilevered section can also
be modeled as
N∑
i=NC +1
M 0
i = g
N∑
i=NC +1
[
mi
(
y0
NC +2R (i−NC )
)]
(11)
where y0
NC =2 R ∑NC
j=1 sin(j ·θC ). Therefore, the total mo-
ment exerted on joint 0 by the extended structure in terms of
only the design and conﬁguration parameters is the sum of (10)
and (11).
M 0 =
N∑
i=1
M 0
i =
NC∑
i=1
M 0
i +
N∑
i=NC +1
M 0
i . (12)
If all joints are assumed to have the same mass ( mi = m)
and a uniform density along the length of the structure, then
the moment can also be expressed analytically by modeling the
mass distribution as a continuous beam with a constant cross
section. The curved segment can be modeled as a quarter-ring,
and the straight section can be modeled as a horizontal beam
of length 2(N −N′
C )R where NC ≈N′
C = πRC
4R . Thus, 10
and 11 can be modeled analytically and summed to yield the
analytical equation for the total moment exerted onto joint 0 by
the extended structure, given by
M 0 =
(π
2 −1
) RC
θc
mg
+(N −N′
C )mg (RC +R ( 1+N −N′
C)). (13)
Given the applied moment, the required actuator force at the
desired bending angle is given by
Fa = 1
Na
M 0
R cosθC
(14)
where Na is the number of actuators embedded in parallel
along the backbone and θC is given in terms of R and RC as
sinθc =2 R/RC . To reach the desired ranges of motion, the
actuators not only must generate sufﬁcient forces to hold the
most demanding conﬁgurations, but also generate them at the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BARHYDT AND ASADA: HIGH-STRENGTH, HIGHL Y -FLEXIBLE ROBOTIC STRAP FOR HARNESSING, LIFTING, AND TRANSFERRING HUMANS 2115
Fig. 9. Active bending experiment with Robotic Strap prototype. The distal
and middle segments were actuated at 0.3 MPa, and the proximal segment was
actuated at 0.16 MPa. Major gridlines are spaced apart by 100 mm.
contracted lengths l required to achieve the bending angles of
the desired conﬁguration. The length l required for a desired
bending angle is given by (3). Given these models, the actuator
force and contraction requirements Fa,req andεreq for a desired
conﬁguration are dependent on R,m, and Na.
D. Design Trade-Offs
These models reveal notable design trade-offs for achieving
the desired performance relevant to the key metrics. Most involve
the joint radius R, in that decreasing R increases the passive
bending resolutionζand the maximum passive curvatureκmax,
but also decreases the tensile strength Tmax and increases the
passive bending resistance Mb,max and actuator force require-
ments Fa,req for a desired maximum active bending curvature
κreq,a,a ss h o w ni n (2), (6), (1), (8), and (14) respectively.
Notably, R acts as an effective “gear ratio” between Fa and
κreq,a, in that it provides the mechanical advantage necessary
to generate the bending motion. These trade-offs can be func-
tionally summarized as: a larger radius is desirable for safely
lifting heavy objects of varying size, and smaller radius is desir-
able for closely passively conforming to complex surfaces with
high-curvature features. A trade-off also underlies the number of
parallel actuatorsNa, in that increasingNa decreasesFa,req but
also increases Mb,max. While increasing Na can also increase
the required width of the cylindrical joint to mount them all,
which can increase the mass, the actuator requirements still
decrease as long as the additional actuators increase the active
bending moment more than the added weight increases the
opposing load.
IV . EXPERIMENTS AND DEMONSTRA TIONS
A. Implementation
A 3-DOF, 1143 mm long, 0.419 kg manipulator prototype
was developed to implement the Robotic Strap design presented
in Section II-C, shown in Fig. 9. The backbone consists of
3D-printed joints fastened together with 0.97 mm thick Kevlar
threads rated to hold up to 58.97 kg each. The joints are made
of a carbon ﬁber ﬁlled nylon ﬁlament (some with continuous
carbon ﬁber reinforcement). Each joint is 38.1 mm in diameter
and 56.8 mm deep with an inner pulley radius of Rip =4 .35
mm. The manipulator consists of three independently actuated
10-joint segments, each with four thin McKibben actuators
Fig. 10. Left: Experimental apparatus for characterizing passive actuator
pure compressive reaction force function fs(l), measured by compressing four
actuators of length l0 =2 R =3 8.1 mm in parallel down to length l =1 8.1
mm using an Instron 5969 tensile testing machine. Right: Measured passive
actuator compression force-displacement data. fs starts to decrease around
l0 −l ≈8 mm when the inner tube begins to buckle, and increases again around
l0 −l ≈15 mm as the outer mesh becomes more compressed.
Fig. 11. Theoretical actuator requirements Fa andεcalculated using 14 and 3
for the worst-case conﬁguration with the desired conﬁguration parameters RC
andLh givenR =1 9.05 mm, Na =4 , m =1 3.98 g.
Fig. 12. Passive bending resistance theoretical and experimental results. Na
denotes the number of parallel actuators mounted along the joints. The ex-
perimental results are lower than the corresponding theoretical upper-limits,
as expected. This implies that the moments applied on the actuators by the
prototyped actuator mounts are not negligible, unlike in the pure compression
assumed by fs(l) in 7.
mounted in parallel. The actuators have an unloaded contraction
ratio of ∼22% and a stall force of ∼20 N at 0.3 MPa. Their
relatively low pressure and ﬂow rate requirements allow the
manipulator to be actuated using a small pump module (e.g.
FlowIO,< 1 kg [17]).
Given these speciﬁcations, the theoretical tensile strength is
Tmax = 2255.3 N (1), and the passive bending resolution is
ζ=2 6.3 DOFs/m (2). The theoretical maximum passive cur-
vature isκmax ≈47.5 rad/m (6) given an estimated compressed
actuator length of lmin,p ≈3.6 mm. Given the passive actuator
compression force-displacement functionfs(l) (determined ex-
perimentally, as shown in Fig. 10), the theoretical upper limits
for passive bending reaction moments at given joint angles were
calculated using 7, as shown in Fig. 12 (Mb,max =0 .123 Nm at
θ=0 .4 rad,Na =4 ). The actuator requirementsFa,req andεreq
were calculated for varying values of the desired conﬁguration
parameters RC and Lh using (14) and 3 (results shown in
Fig. 11).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2116 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, APRIL 2023
Fig. 13. (a) Backbone tensile strength experimental apparatus. (b) Passive
bending curvature experimental apparatus (Na =4 ). The rotating joint was bent
as far as possible until met with rigid resistance, and the angle was measured
to determine the associated radius of curvature. (c) Passive bending resistance
experimental apparatus ( Na =4 ). An Imada MF-2 force gauge was used to
push the tip of the rotating joint moment arm extension and hold the joint at
certain bending angles, and the reaction moment was calculated for each angle
based on the measured force.
B. Key Characteristics V alidation
To validate the design in terms of its key characteristics,
the tensile strength, passive bending ﬂexibility, and active self-
articulation capability were experimentally determined.
1) Tensile Strength: The tensile strength of the backbone was
tested on an Instron 5969 tensile testing system, as shown in
Fig. 13(a). The sample withstood 1314.2 N (134.0 kg) before
breaking, with the failure point occurring at the knot for one of
the inner pulley thread loops. Since a strap in the closed-loop
conﬁguration splits the harnessed load between its two hanging
sides in tension, this implies that a single Robotic Strap can
hold up to 2628.4 N (268.0 kg). The measured tensile strength
is 58.3% of the modeled value, most likely due to reductions
in the Kevlar cord’s strength at the knots. Still, given that the
average weight of adult males aged 20 and over in the United
States is 90.6 kg (77.5 kg for females), [18] these results well
exceed the requirements for lifting the full weight of a human.
2) Passive Bending Flexibility: The passive bending ﬂexi-
bility was validated by experimentally measuring the passive
bending resolution, curvature, and resistance. The passive bend-
ing resolution was directly measured to be ζ=2 6.25 DOFs/m,
as expected. The maximum passive bending curvature and resis-
tance were measured using the apparatus presented in Fig. 13(b)
and (c), respectively.
The maximum passive bending curvature was measured to be
κmax,p =4 2.01 rad/m (RC,min =0 .0238 m). This is close to the
theoretical value, although slightly lower due to approximation
error in lmin,p. Given this result, the minimum object diameter
the Robotic Strap can harness is 2RC,min −2R =9 .5 mm,
which is reasonably smaller than any human body feature that
would need to be conformed to.
The measured passive bending resistance results are shown in
Fig. 12. These experimental results are lower than the modeled
upper limit results for Na =4 across their entire domain, as
expected. This implies that the actuator mounts apply non-
negligible bending moments onto the actuators (unlike in the
pure compression case described by fs(l) in 7), which aligns
with the observations made during experimentation. Thus, the
model provides a conservative estimate for the passive bending
resistance.
Fig. 14. Automatic full body weight harnessing and lifting demonstration
(participant A weighing 78.2 kg shown). With the participant seated and the
Robotic Strap prototype hanging downward at their side, the prototype artic-
ulated underneath the participant and hooked its tip onto the end of a linear
actuator positioned on their other side, as shown in (a) and (b). The Robotic
Strap was suspended by a winch and cable system that automatically lifts and
lowers its base. Both ends of the prototype were then retracted upwards to lift
the participant by∼350 mm, as shown in (c). The participant was suspended at
this height for ∼15 seconds before being lowered back down onto the platform
in the same seated position, as shown in (d).
3) Active Self-Articulation: To validate the actuator require-
ments model, the Robotic Strap was actuated as shown in Fig. 9
to test whether it achieves the expected curvature given the
expected actuator force/contraction (determined from separate
loading tests). Given an expected actuator performance of ε=
0.855 under a 1 kg load at 0.3 MPa, the manipulator theoretically
should achieve a conﬁguration with a radius of curvature of at
most RC =0 .246 m assuming a hanging length of Lh =0 m
(based on 3, 4, and 14). Thus, a curvature diameter smaller than
0.492 m is expected. An effective curvature diameter of ∼0.40
m was achieved (Fig. 9), which satisﬁes the expected results.
C. Demonstrations
To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the Robotic Strap
for automatically harnessing, lifting, and transferring humans
safely, the prototype was used to: (1) harness, lift, and suspend
the full weight of a human (outlined in Fig. 14), and (2) assist
a chair-to-chair transfer task (outlined in Fig. 15), similar to the
standard manual bed-to-wheelchair transfer task[1]. The second
demonstration also illustrates the Robotic Strap’s capacity to be
actively extended from and retracted into a drum. The proto-
type was teleoperated in both demonstrations with a maximum
pressure of 0.3 MPa. The ﬁrst demonstration was repeated for
two participants A and B (78.2 kg and 63.5 kg, respectively).
The second demonstration was performed with one participant
C (50.3 kg). The entire study was approved by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology’s Internal Review Board.
The prototype was successful in completing every step of both
demonstrations for all participants, performed entirely automat-
ically without any external physical intervention (aside from
manually rotating the chair-to-chair transfer apparatus). After
the demonstrations were completed, the participants rated the
pain and discomfort that they experienced on a 7-point Likert
scale (1=none, 7=unbearable). For the ﬁrst demonstration, Par-
ticipants A and B both reported a pain level of 1 and a discomfort
level of 2 and 3 (i.e. insigniﬁcant and easily manageable), re-
spectively. For the second demonstration, participant C reported
a pain level of 1 and a discomfort level of 2, and noted that the
discomfort was from pressure being applied on their side by the
tip latching mechanism, not from the Robotic Strap itself.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BARHYDT AND ASADA: HIGH-STRENGTH, HIGHL Y -FLEXIBLE ROBOTIC STRAP FOR HARNESSING, LIFTING, AND TRANSFERRING HUMANS 2117
Fig. 15. Automatic chair-to-chair transfer demonstration. With the partici-
pant (participant C) seated facing the apparatus, the Robotic Strap prototype
automatically extended outward from a coiled drum, as shown in (a), (b). The
prototype then bent around the participant and attached its tip to a latch at the
end of a linear actuator, as shown in (c). The prototype was then retracted into
the drum while the tip was pulled inward by the linear actuator to tightly wrap
around the participant’s back and lift them off the chair, as shown in (d). The
apparatus structure was then manually rotated to position the participant over
the destination chair, and then the prototype and linear actuator were extended
to lower them into it, as shown in (e), (f). The prototype then disconnected from
the latch and retracted back into the drum, as shown in (g), (h).
V. C ONCLUSION
This letter presents the concept, design, modeling, and im-
plementation of the Robotic Strap, a new type of manipulator
with the passive characteristics of straps and the active ability
to articulate itself into desired harnessing conﬁgurations. The
Robotic Strap manipulator is the ﬁrst robot to demonstrate
automatic harnessing and lifting of a human above the ground.
The high tensile strength and bending ﬂexibility of the design
makes it “strap-like” because they are the primary characteristics
that make straps beneﬁcial for safely harnessing, lifting, and
suspending humans, in that (1) high tensile strength allows for
load bearing capacities great enough to lift the full weight of
the human, and (2) high bending ﬂexibility allows for the high
passive compliance and conformity needed to safely distribute
these large forces across the body. Future work will include
further formalization of this design paradigm, optimizations
for the design’s size and performance, and the development of
autonomous control methods.
REFERENCES
[1] P . A. Williams, Fundamental Concepts and Skills for Nursing .N e wY o r k ,
NY , USA:Elsevier, Feb. 2021.
[2] T. Mukai, S. Hirano, M. Y oshida, H. Nakashima, S. Guo, and Y . Hayakawa,
“Whole-body contact manipulation using tactile information for the
nursing-care assistant robot RIBA,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2011, pp. 2445–2451.
[3] “TMC shows new nursing and healthcare robots in Tokyo Toyota Motor
corporation ofﬁcial global website,” Accessed: Feb. 21, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://global.toyota/en/detail/210795
[4] M. Cianchetti, C. Laschi, A. Menciassi, and P . Dario, “Biomedical ap-
plications of soft robotics,” Nat. Rev. Mater ., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 143–153,
Jun. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/articles/s41578-
018-0022-y
[5] S. Kurumaya, H. Nabae, G. Endo, and K. Suzumori, “Design of thin
McKibben muscle and multiﬁlament structure,” Sens. Actuators, A.
Phys., vol. 261, pp. 66–74, Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924424716308792
[6] O. Kilic Afsar et al., “OmniFiber: Integrated ﬂuidic ﬁber actuators
for weaving movement based interactions into the ‘fabric of every-
day life,” in Proc. 34th Annu. ACM Symp. User Interface Softw. Tech-
nol., 2021, pp. 1010–1026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3472749.3474802
[7] P . H. Nguyen, C. Sparks, S. G. Nuthi, N. M. V ale, and P . Polygerinos, “Soft
poly-limbs: Toward a new paradigm of mobile manipulation for daily
living tasks,” Soft Robot. , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 38–53, Oct. 2018. [Online].
Available: http://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/soro.2018.0065
[8] C. Loh and H. Tsukagoshi, “Pneumatic big-hand gripper with slip-in tip
aimed for the transfer support of the human body,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Automat., 2014, pp. 475–481, ISSN:1050-4729.
[9] E. W. Hawkes, L. H. Blumenschein, J. D. Greer, and A. M. Okamura,
“A soft robot that navigates its environment through growth,” Sci. Robot.,
vol. 2, no. 8, Jul. 2017, Art. no. eaan3028. [Online]. Available: http://www.
science.org/doi/full/10.1126/scirobotics.aan3028
[10] S.-G. Jeong et al., “A tip mount for transporting sensors and tools using
soft growing robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst .,
2020, pp. 8781–8788.
[11] M. M. Coad, R. P . Thomasson, L. H. Blumenschein, N. S. Usevitch, E. W.
Hawkes, and A. M. Okamura, “Retraction of soft growing robots without
buckling,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett. , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 2115–2122,
Apr. 2020.
[12] W. McMahan et al., “Field trials and testing of the OctArm continuum
manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat ., 2006, pp. 2336–
2341.
[13] S. Hirose and Y . Umetani, “The development of soft gripper for the ver-
satile robot hand,” Mechanism Mach. Theory, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 351–359,
Jan. 1978. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0094114X78900599
[14] J. Burgner-Kahrs, D. C. Rucker, and H. Choset, “Continuum robots for
medical applications: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 31, no. 6,
pp. 1261–1280, Dec. 2015.
[15] S. Kolachalama and S. Lakshmanan, “Continuum robots for ma-
nipulation applications: A survey,” J. Robot , vol. 2020, Jul. 2020,
Art. no. e4187048. [Online]. Available: https://www.hindawi.com/
journals/jr/2020/4187048/
[16] X. Dong et al., “Development of a slender continuum robotic system for
on-wing inspection/repair of gas turbine engines,” Robot. Comput.-Integr .
Manuf., vol. 44, pp. 218–229, Apr. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736584516300801
[17] A. Shtarbanov, “FlowIO Development Platform–the Pneumatic “Rasp-
berry Pi” for Soft Robotics,” in Proc. Extended Abstr . Conf. Hum. Factors
Comput. Syst, 2021, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3411763.3451513
[18] C. D. Fryar, M. D. Carroll, Q. Gu, J. Afful, and C. L. Ogden, “Anthropo-
metric reference data for children and adults : United states 2015–2018,”
Vital Health Stat, vol. 3, no. 36, pp. 1–44, Jan. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/100478
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 