InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable
Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces
Takafumi Morita
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
morita@xlab.iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Ziyuan Jiang
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
jiang@xlab.iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Kanon Aoyama
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
aoyama@xlab.iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Ayato Minaminosono
Shibaura Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nb20108@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Yu Kuwajima
Shibaura Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nb21105@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Naoki Hosoya
Shibaura Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
hosoya@sic.shibaura-it.ac.jp
Shingo Maeda
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
maeshin@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Yasuaki Kakehi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
kakehi@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Figure 1: InflatableMod. (A) InflatableMod consists of Phase-change Control Module and Pouch Module, (B) Linear liquid-to-gas
phase change actuator control, (C) Reconfigurable inflatable lump, (D) Dynamically arrangeable inflatable stand, (E) Silent
biomimetic soft actuator.
ABSTRACT
Inflatable systems have been attracting attention in the field of
interaction design. Conventional tabletop-sized pneumatic systems
tend to be complex because they require bulky and noisy equipment.
Therefore, several liquid-to-gas phase change actuators that use va-
porization have been proposed. But these actuators have problems
with controllability, reusability, and reconfigurability. In this study,
we propose InflatableMod, novel inflatable modules based on the
efficient control of liquid-to-gas phase change actuators. These are
designed with a compact circuit that has a liquid transfer function
to feed the required amount of low-boiling-point liquid into the
pouch and a heating function to inflate the pouch by the volume
change. This approach allows for a compact, silent, and unteth-
ered inflatable system. It is also possible to create an untethered
and reconfigurable multi-inflatable system because each module is
synchronized. In this paper, we propose the design of the modules,
evaluate their performance, and present application scenarios.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5/23/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581353
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and
tools.
KEYWORDS
Programmable Materials, Inflatables, Multi-inflatables, Pneumatic,
Liquid-to-gas Phase Change Actuators, Electrohydrodynamics.
ACM Reference Format:
Takafumi Morita, Ziyuan Jiang, Kanon Aoyama, Ayato Minaminosono, Yu
Kuwajima, Naoki Hosoya, Shingo Maeda, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2023. Inflat-
ableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-
sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23), April 23–28,
2023, Hamburg, Germany. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581353
1 INTRODUCTION
Shape-changing interfaces have long attracted attention because
they can dynamically change the shape of substantial objects. Vari-
ous studies on shape-changing interfaces have their roots in tan-
gible [42] or organic user interfaces [21]. They draw on expertise
from various disciplines. Recent developments on shape-changing
interfaces are not only in the field of HCI but also in engineer-
ing, architecture, behavioral science, design, and many other fields,
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
including comprehensive studies of grand challenges [4] or affor-
dances [34].
Particularly, inflatable shape-changing interfaces have the ad-
vantage of being freely changeable in volume. Various inflata-
bles have been proposed, ranging from general-purpose inter-
faces [28, 32, 40, 53] with dynamic shape changes to specific applica-
tions [1, 19, 22, 30, 41] such as haptic sensation, portable mobility, or
soft robotics. In addition, shape-changing interfaces [10, 14, 16, 45–
48, 54] that construct structures using multiple inflatables have
been proposed as high-potential applications because they enable
more complex shape changes by increasing the number of inflatable
bladders.
However, there are still many challenges for inflatables in prac-
tical applications. Conventional pneumatic systems usually use air
compressors for large-sized systems and commercial pneumatic
pumps for tabletop-sized systems as the drive source. Both require
external equipment as a drive source to feed air through tubing
and are not self-contained systems. Most of these drive sources
are noisy. In addition, most previous studies use active valves for
pneumatic control, which further increases the drive noise on top
of the drive source. Furthermore, the conventional multi-inflatable
system requires separate tubing and active valves for each bladder
to allow air to flow in and out of each inflatable. These extra setups
make the entire system bulky and complex, limiting the layout of
the placement.
Several liquid-to-gas phase change actuators [3, 17, 18, 27, 29, 50],
which utilize the volume change that occurs during the vaporization
process, have been proposed in recent years. These actuators are
not bulky owing to the absence of tubing, and can be driven silently
and flexibly. However, most existing liquid-to-gas phase change
actuators are made from small flat pouches, and three-dimensional
pouches such as cubes are rarely made due to heating efficiency
challenges. Furthermore, it is difficult to control heating by phase
change. It is limited to discrete on/off states, either fully operational
or fully stationary, making it difficult to inflate programmatically
to the middle states. Additionally, the module can be used only
a limited number of times. Reconfigurability also needs to be im-
proved because the design cannot be changed once the liquid is
filled in advance. Thus, there are still many challenges in order to
utilize liquid-to-gas phase change actuators in practical inflatable
applications.
In this paper, we propose InflatableMod, novel inflatable mod-
ules based on the efficient control of liquid-to-gas phase change
actuators. These are designed with a compact circuit that has a
liquid transfer function and a heating function. InflatableMod con-
sists of Phase-change Control Module and Pouch Module. The
Phase-change Control Module generates liquid flow and feeds a
low-boiling-point liquid into the Pouch Module. The temperature of
the liquid is controlled by a Peltier device, which causes the Pouch
Module to inflate by the volume change of the phase change. We
also utilize electrohydrodynamic (EHD) pumps [5–7, 9, 15, 24, 33],
based on the EHD phenomenon [35, 36, 38], for the pump function
to generate liquid flow because of their ability to drive quite silently.
In addition, it has a high degree of freedom of placement and can
be embedded into objects in different shapes. The EHD phenom-
enon generates liquid flow when a high voltage is applied to a
dielectric liquid. Using an EHD pump, the liquid flow is generated
simply by placing an electrode in the liquid and applying a voltage,
eliminating the need for mechanical moving parts. Furthermore,
by feeding only the required amount of low-boiling-point liquid
into the Pouch Module and then efficiently controlling the heat-
ing, the previously-mentioned drawbacks of existing liquid-to-gas
phase change actuators can be mitigated and resolved. This feature
enables the creation of inflatable systems of various shapes and
sizes by liquid-to-gas phase change, as well as control in the middle
range. In addition, as each module is wirelessly synchronized, it is
possible to create a multi-inflatable system in which each inflatable
structure is untethered and can be reconfigured for placement. This
allows inflatables to be placed anywhere without having to con-
sider the location of tubing and valves, eliminating the limitation
of the module layout and system complexity that have been the
challenges for multi-inflatables.
In this study, we present the module design, evaluate the perfor-
mance of InflatableMod as an inflatable system, and show the possi-
ble application scenarios. The core novelty of this paper lies in the
first exploration of the novel inflatable approach in tabletop-sized
inflatables free from extra device requirements, tubing constraints,
and noises. In summary, we contributed:
(1) An efficient liquid-to-gas phase change control that silently
inflates three-dimensional pouches for tabletop-sized inflat-
ables.
(2) A liquid-to-gas phase change control that changes an inflat-
able’s volume continuously by feeding the pouch only with
the required amount of liquid.
(3) Design and fabrication pipeline of InflatableMod that allow
for easy replication.
(4) A technical evaluation of performance and quietness as an
inflatable system.
(5) Novel application scenarios enabled by silent, untethered,
and reconfigurable inflatables.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Pneumatic Shape-Changing Interfaces
Pneumatic shape-changing interfaces have been actively studied in
various fields, mainly in object deformation and tactile feedback,
owing to their advantage of freely changing volume.
Various interfaces with dynamic shape changes have been
proposed, ranging from versatile to application-specific. Various
general-purpose methods are available. PneUI [53] has several pneu-
matic prototypes that render curvature, volume, and texture. Aero-
Morph [32] proposed a textile-based design space that could be
folded into various shapes using multiple heat-sealing methods.
Printflatables [40] is a design and fabrication system for human-
scale, functional and dynamic inflatable objects. MorphIO [28] com-
bines inflatable modules with built-in deformation sensing to pro-
vide soft actuators with interactions. Various studies have been con-
ducted on specific applications. For use in mobility, poimo [30, 41],
a portable and inflatable mobility device with a mechanism made
of a mass-producible material called drop-stitch fabric, has been
proposed. Artificial muscles using air pressure have also been pro-
posed, woven into fabric [19] and applied to muscles with various
characteristics and shapes [ 1]. OmniFiber [ 22] is proposed as a
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
soft-wire-based material system for designing motion-based inter-
actions for on-body and on-object applications. Several toolkits
have also been released in recent years to lower the barrier of en-
try for handling gases. Some of the best-known ones are The Soft
Robotics Toolkit [20], Pneuduino [31, 37], Programmable Air [2],
MorpheesPlug [23], and FlowIO [44], which have been a great help
in pneumatic prototyping.
As mentioned above, various pneumatic interfaces have been
proposed. As the drive source, air compressors are used for pneu-
matic modules in larger-sized pneumatics systems [8, 10, 32, 40, 45,
46, 48, 53], while commercial pneumatic pumps such as diaphragm
pumps are often used for tabletop-sized ones [14, 22, 28, 47, 54]. The
toolkits [2, 20, 23, 31, 37, 44] described above also use commercially
available pneumatic pumps. Air compressors are large and loud.
Commercial pumps usually use solenoid valves and active valves,
making the pump noisy as well. In terms of inflatable interfaces,
noises tend to be distracting and irritating to users and affect user
experience. To address these challenges of tabletop-sized inflatables,
we present a novel approach to inflatables that does not require
external equipment and is driven with no noise.
2.2 Multi-Inflatable Shape-Changing Interfaces
There are not only single-inflatable shape-changing interfaces but
also multi-inflatable shape-changing interfaces that use multiple
inflatable structures. Multi-inflatable shape-changing interfaces
allow for more complicated shape change by increasing the number
of inflatable bladders; therefore, a study with high potential for
application has been proposed.
TilePop [48], which consists of cubic airbags arranged in a 2D
array with a folding structure, is an interface for whole-body inter-
actions in virtual reality. Similarly, LiftTiles [45, 46] are building
blocks for prototyping room-scale shape-changing interfaces uti-
lizing an array of inflatable actuators. The Force Jacket [ 10] has
26 airbags mounted on the jacket, presenting complex tactile feed-
back throughout the upper body. COLORISE [14] is a display that
can deform and change the color of objects arranged on pixels by
stretching an elastomer membrane under air pressure. PuPoP [47]
is a lightweight pneumatic shape-proxy interface worn on the palm
and uses one or more inflatables to represent handheld objects in
a VR environment. Bubble [ 54] is a wearable device that allows
one to grasp objects by attaching multiple inflatable units to the
fingers. Layer by Layer [16] introduces a layer-driven design for
soft surfaces that enables the production of dynamic, discretely
actuated surfaces at multiple scales.
Thus, various multi-inflatable shape-changing interfaces have
been proposed for room-scale applications, virtual reality, and hu-
man interaction. However, tubing and active valves are required
for each inflatable structure to move air in and out of each in-
flatable separately when driving multi-inflatables. The need for
considering the location of tubes and valves limits the freedom
in inflatables’ location allocation and system’s layout design. Al-
though many challenges remain for multi-inflatable systems, few
previous studies have addressed them. PneuSeries [ 8] alleviates
layout constraints in a multi-inflatable structure with bidirectional
check valves that passively regulate airflow into and out of adja-
cent inflatables. Some toolkits [2, 20, 23, 31, 37, 44] mentioned in
Section 2.1 expand the system and use the pneumatic drive source
as a multi-channel. However, the former [ 8] has limitations on
the sequential inflation order of each inflatable and does not allow
synchronized control of all inflatables. Those toolkits that use the
pneumatic drive source as a multi-channel system require tubes and
valves for each inflatable structure. Hence, it remains a complicated
and limited multi-inflatable system.
To address these challenges of tabletop-sized multi-inflatables,
we introduce a novel approach to multi-inflatables that is untethered
by tubing and allows simultaneous control and free placement of
each inflatable structure.
2.3 Liquid-to-gas Phase Change Actuators
Liquid-to-gas phase change actuators utilize the volume change
of the vaporization. Various types of liquid-to-gas phase change
actuators have been proposed, ranging from engineering research
to applied use.
Some engineering researches have been conducted. A flexible
thin actuator, which is an encircling actuator consisting of a plastic
sheet, a low boiling point liquid, and a flexible heater, is proposed [3].
Flexibility is achieved using a flexible heater composed of a func-
tional liquid with carbon nanotubes [ 50]. Moreover, there is an
electric phase-change actuator [27], which is a printable fluid actu-
ator controlled by an inkjet-printed electric heater. Liquid Pouch
Motors [29] is a family of printable soft actuators that consist of
one or more gas-tight bladders filled with a low-boiling-point liq-
uid. Laser Pouch Motors [ 18] has been proposed as a method to
evaporate small amounts of low-boiling-point liquid using heating
by laser projection. Micro Elastic Pouch Motors [17] is elastically
deformable and miniaturized soft actuators that use liquid-to-gas
phase change, in which a low-boiling-point liquid is enclosed in
an elastic rubber pouch. Several applied uses have also been pro-
posed. milliMorph [25] proposes a design space and manufacturing
system for creating millimeter-scale fluid chambers and channels.
Smart Thermally Actuating Textiles [39] are smart textiles that can
shrink or expand in response to temperature. Hapouch [51, 52] is
a wearable tactile display device that uses a liquid-to-gas phase
change actuator and a Peltier device.
Although various liquid-to-gas phase change actuators have
been proposed, there are still practical challenges. Most existing
liquid-to-gas phase change actuators are made in small flat pouches,
and few three-dimensional pouches such as cubes are made. Pre-
cise inflation of 3D pouches is a challenge because the speed of
vaporization and efficient heating methods must be considered.
Furthermore, heating control to vaporize is difficult to achieve the
desired volume, even if a closed-loop feedback is applied to achieve
the targeted temperature. Therefore, vaporazation control is lim-
ited to only discrete on/off states, and it is challenging to control
at intermediate states. Because of the difficulty of volume control,
previous works have been conducted using only one liquid-to-gas
phase change actuator, and simultaneous control over multiple
actuators has rarely been possible. In liquid-to-gas phase change
actuators, a low-boiling-point liquid called Novec 7000[11] is com-
monly used. However, Novec usually contains dissolved air that
gradually evaporates into the pouch over time. Since the air cannot
escape from the pouch, the Pouch Module inflates over time after
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
repeated use, raising the issue of reusability. There is also an issue
of reconfigurability. Conventional liquid-to-gas phase change ac-
tuators require the pouch to be filled with liquid in advance and
inflates only corresponding to the fixed amount of liquid contained
in the pouch. In the sight of fabrication, once the liquid is encapsu-
lated and sealed in a pouch, it is difficult to adjust the inflatable’s
design afterward.
Hence, we propose efficient phase change control methods to re-
alize continuous control of liquid-to-gas phase change actuators in
three-dimensional pouches. Furthermore, the InflatableMod solves
the aforementioned issues of reusability and reconfigurability, since
the pouches can be freely attached or detached.
3 INFLATABLEMOD
In this section, we describe the system overview of Inflatable-
Mod, the efficient phase-change control method, and the deflation
method.
3.1 System Overview
InflatableMod consists of inflatable modules for tabletop-sized pneu-
matic physical interfaces that can be silently driven and freely
placed. InflatableMod was designed based on the following require-
ments for use as versatile pneumatic physical interfaces:
• It can be driven as a compact, untethered, self-contained
module in a simple system configuration that operates with-
out needing bulky, heavy, and noisy equipment.
• It can be designed to be reconfigurable with inflatables of
various shapes and sizes.
• It can be used repeatedly and can control inflatables in inter-
mediate states.
• Multiple modules can be controlled wirelessly at the same
time.
As shown in Fig. 2, InflatableMod consists of Phase-change Con-
trol Module and Pouch Module. The Phase-change Control Module
has a liquid transfer function to generate liquid flow and feed low-
boiling-point liquid into the Pouch Module and a liquid heating
function to drive the liquid-to-gas phase change efficiently. The
Pouch Module is a bladder that can be fabricated and inflated into
various shapes and sizes depending on the application.
The operation of the inflatable system with the InflatableMod is
conducted in six steps, as shown in Fig. 3. First, (A) a low-boiling-
point liquid is injected into a small tank inside the Phase-change
Control Module. Thereafter, (B) the Pouch Module and the Phase-
change Control Module are attached together. (C) The inflatable
system is then operated remotely using simple GUI software on a
smartphone. (D) The liquid heating function of the Phase-change
Control Module is then driven to heat the reservoir dish of the Pouch
Module. Next, (E) the liquid transfer function is driven to feed the
low-boiling-point liquid at an efficient timing to the reservoir dish
of the Pouch Module that has just been heated. These operational
flows allow the Pouch Module to be inflated by volume change on
vaporization. InflatableMod uses Novec 7000 [ 11] with a boiling
point of 34◦C as the low-boiling-point liquid.
Thus, the ability to drive inflatables with such a simple process
allows them to be used in a highly versatile manner.
Figure 2: InflatableMod supports Phase-change Control Mod-
ule and Pouch Module. Pouch Module have a variety of
shapes and sizes, depending on the applications.
Figure 3: Six step process to operate an inflatable system with
InflatableMod: (A) inject Novec 7000 into the tank of Phase-
change Control Module, (B) connect the Pouch Module to the
Phase-change Control Modules, (C) control the system with
simple GUI software, (D) heat the reserving dish of Pouch
Module, (E) feed low-boiling-point liquid into the Pouch
Module, (F) inflate the Pouch Module.
3.2 Efficient Phase-change Control Method
We describe an efficient phase-change control method, one of the
features of InflatableMod. InflatableMod proposed new approaches
by introducing a geometric structure that facilitates heat transfer
and heating control that promotes liquid vaporization.
3.2.1 Reservoir dish’s geometric structure that facilitates heat trans-
fer. As shown in the left of Fig. 4, most of the existing liquid-to-gas
phase change actuators heat the low-boiling-point liquid contained
in a pouch from the pouch surface. Therefore, the heating efficiency
of the liquid is poor because some surfaces are not directly heated
by the low-boiling-point liquid. Many approaches to heating have
been attempted, including flexible heaters, silver nanoinks, and
lasers, but few pouch designs have considered the surface of the
liquid to be heated. In contrast, we prepared a reservoir dish such
that the liquid is placed only at the heated point, as shown in the
right of Fig. 4. This allows efficient heat to be provided to the liquid,
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
which vaporizes faster, as there is no place for the liquid to settle
but at the heated point.
Furthermore, the reservoir dish repeatedly vaporizes the liquid
for inflation and receives liquefied gas that flows back into the dish
along insides of the pouch. Only the reservoir dish and the Peltier
device need to face z-dir, but the other parts can be placed in any
orientation, including wall-mounted.
Figure 4: Approach to structural geometry that facilitates
heat transfer. (Left) Conventional general pouch shape.
(Right) proposed pouch shape utilizing a reservoir dish.
3.2.2 Heating control that promotes liquid vaporization. Moreover,
we present an approach for heating control that promotes liquid
vaporization. InflatableMod does not require a low-boiling-point
liquid to be contained in the pouch in advance. It can feed only
the necessary amount of low-boiling-point liquid into the pouch,
speeding up the vaporization process. As shown in Fig. 5, a typical
method is first to store the liquid in a reservoir dish and then heat it;
however, this method takes time for all liquid to be heated since the
volume of liquid per heating surface is large. Therefore, as shown
in Fig. 6, by slowly dropping the low-boiling-point liquid onto the
heating surface, the volume per heating surface is significantly
reduced, and the liquid vaporizes immediately after dropping. In
the first cycle, a small amount of the liquid is fed into the reservoir
dish before heating to avoid damaging the Peltier device. If the
Peltier device is heated with no liquid, the temperature difference
between the heating and cooling surfaces will be too large, and
the device will break down. Therefore, it is necessary to first feed
a small amount of liquid into the reservoir dish as a heat sink for
the Peltier device. From the second cycle, there is always liquid on
the heated reservoir dish, so there is no risk of failure due to dry
heating.
These two approaches described in 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 improve the
operation speed by increasing the efficiency of the vaporization
process. Furthermore, this allows the liquid-to-gas phase change to
be used in three-dimensional pouches, which has been difficult in
the past.
3.2.3 Backflow prevention for programmable check valves with liq-
uid transfer function. The major role of liquid transfer control in
Figure 5: A common control method: It is to first store a low-
boiling-point liquid in a reservoir dish and then heat.
Figure 6: Proposed control method: The volume of liquid
per heating surface is significantly reduced, by dropping the
low-boiling-point liquid little by little against the heating
surface.
InflatableMod is also discussed here. The liquid transfer control
delivers liquid to the reservoir dish and significantly contributes
as a programmable check valve. The InflatableMod delivers the
required amount of low-boiling-point liquid to the Pouch Module,
which is then heated to cause a liquid-to-gas phase change that
inflates the pouch. However, because there is a flow path to feed
the liquid into the pouch, simply heating the pouch causes the gas
to flow back when it vaporizes. Therefore, to prevent backflow, the
pump is not turned off during heating but is driven at a pressure
below the threshold for pushing liquid into the reservoir dish, as
shown in Fig. 5 and 6. The output power of the check valve can be
changed dynamically according to the pouch size and the amount of
liquid to be injected. The EHD pump can prevent backflow without
using a mechanical check valve.
3.3 Deflation Method
InflatableMod has two major deflation methods. The first method
is deflation which uses a phase change from gas to liquid. This
deflation method is shown in Fig. 7. The inflation flow is briefly
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
described below (a-1~5). First, from the initial state (a-1), the low-
boiling-point liquid is poured into Pouch Module (a-2,3). Then, the
backflow prevention control described in 3.2.3 is activated. Because
the liquid pushed by the EHD Pump continuously stays in the
channel connecting the tank and the pouch, the air cannot escape
from the Pouch Module. This is considered as a pseudo-closed-valve
state (a-4): the liquid in the channel functions as a stopper of the
imaginary valve for sealing the gas inside. The low-boiling-point
liquid is heated from the surface of the Pouch Module to induce
a phase change and inflates the pouch (a-5). After the heating for
inflation is stopped, the backflow prevention control is kept active
for deflation operation (a-6). The inside of the pouch keeps the
pseudo-close-valve state, and deflation occurs due to the volume
change caused by the gas-to-liquid phase change.
The second method is deflation which uses self-weight and neg-
ative pressure. Fig. 8 shows the second deflation method. The infla-
tion flow is described (b-1~5). This is the same as the first method
(a-1~5). The first step is to attach a self-weight, such as butterfly
wings shown in application 6.4, to the Pouch Module. Then, the
liquid is returned to the Pump Unit with the backflow prevention
turned off (b-6). Since the liquid no longer blocks the path that the
air in the Pouch Module escapes, the inside of the pouch becomes
a pseudo-open-valve state. The Pouch Module is first subjected to
negative pressure and then to a release state in which no pressure
is applied. Therefore, the self-weight causes the pouch to deflate in
a short time. At this time, the gas inside the pouch escapes through
the ventholes in the Phase-change Control Module’s Pump Unit.
This method deflates quickly and has a high affinity for represent-
ing kinetic motion. The actual deflation time is determined by the
weight of the self-weight and the size of the Pouch Module. The
heavier the self-weight or smaller the Pouch Module, the shorter
the deflation time. In the biomimetic actuator shown in application
6.4, the self-weight of the butterfly wings is 8 g and the volume of
the Pouch Module is approximate 25 mm x 40 mm x 10 mm. The
deflation time in this case is approximately 10 seconds. Even if the
pouch runs low on liquid after repeated deflation operations, it can
be used repeatedly by simply filling it again from the tank in the
Pump Unit of the Phase-change Control Module (b-2,3).
Figure 7: The pipeline of deflation method using a phase
change from gas to liquid.
4 DESIGN AND FABRICATION PROCESS
In this section, we summarize the design and fabrication process
of each module. Subsequently, we describe the untethered and
reconfigurable multi-inflatable design and user interface.
Figure 8: The pipeline of deflation method using self-weight
and negative pressure.
4.1 Phase-change Control Module
This subsection first describes the principle of the quiet pump func-
tion and then introduces the system design of the Phase-change
Control Module.
4.1.1 Principle of Silent Pump Function Utilizing EHD Pump. In-
flatableMod utilizes EHD pumps, which are characterized by their
lightweight and quietness. Among the types of EHD pumps, we
adopt EHD pumps with comb-shaped electrodes that produce stable
pressure and flow rate. The mechanism diagram in Fig. 9 explains
the operating principle of the EHD pump. Comb-shaped electrodes
are placed in a dielectric liquid so that the two electrodes, positive
and negative, face each other. Then, by applying a high voltage to
these electrodes, an electric field is generated between them. As a
result of this generated electric field, the dielectric liquid is ionized
and moved to the electrode side of the opposite charge, resulting
in a swimming phenomenon. This generated electric field ionizes
the dielectric liquid. As ions move from cathode to anode of the
electrodes, a liquid flow is generated. With this technology, liquid
flow can be generated without mechanical parts and is used in this
system as a lightweight and quiet pump.
Figure 9: Mechanism diagram of EHD phenomenon at comb-
shaped electrodes layout.
4.1.2 System Design of Phase-change Control Module. Fig. 10
shows the system design of the Phase-change Control Module.
The Phase-change Control Module consists of two units: the Pump
Unit, which contains the EHD pump, and the Control Unit, which
has both a high-voltage control function to drive the Pump Unit and
a liquid heating function. During operation, a low-boiling-point
liquid is filled in the tank of the Pump Unit, and the Control Unit
applies a high voltage of 1 - 5 kV to generate liquid flow with the
EHD pump. The Control Unit then controls the liquid heating for
the liquid-to-gas phase change. The Control Unit and Pump Unit are
electrically bonded by magnets so that the amount of low-boiling-
point liquid in the tank can be adjusted based on the application.
The design allows for handy replacement.
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 10: System design of the Phase-change Control Mod-
ule.
4.1.3 Electronic Implementation of Control Unit. There is a descrip-
tion of how the Phase-change Control Module is implemented
electronically in the Control Unit. The Adafruit QT Py is used as
the microcontroller, and the ATSAMD21E18 is used as the main
processor, allowing for a compact configuration and the use of the
generic Arduino development environment. The high voltage ap-
plied to the EHD pump is controlled using an ultra-miniature high
voltage DC to DC converter, UMHV0550 (HVM Technology, Inc.).
A Peltier device is used to control the liquid-to-gas phase change
because of the short rising time in heating. Round-shaped Peltier
elements (TEC1-050031026) and square-shaped Peltier elements
(TEC1-07103) are mainly used for freedom of placement. The radio
function uses the nRF24L01+ (Nordic Semiconductors) 2.4 GHz
radio described above. A 2-cell lithium polymer battery is used for
the power supply because of its small size and power efficiency.
The Control Unit is sufficiently small to fit in the palm of the hand
( 20 mm × 50 mm × 15 mm ).
4.1.4 Fabrication Process of Pump Unit. The Pump Unit is based
on the Pump Module of HydroMod [26], which was presented as
constructive modules for hydraulic prototyping. The Pump unit of
the proposed InflatableMod is designed to be extended to a built-in
small tank. It consists of six layers: a Kapton sheet as the foundation,
copper tape for the comb-shaped electrodes that cause the EHD
phenomenon, a neodymium magnet as the connection with the
Control unit, a VHB sheet as the flow path, an acrylic plate to
protect the flow path, and a small tank that contains low-boiling-
point liquid. For the connection to the Pouch Module, a silicon
tube with high sealing performance and easy handling is used.
Therefore, the Pouch Module can be reconfigurable according to
the application. The Pump unit is also sufficiently small to fit in the
palm ( 22 mm × 50 mm × 20 mm ).
Figure 11: Structure of Pump unit in Phase-change Control
Module.
4.2 Pouch Module
In this subsection, we introduce the basic structure and fabrication
process of the reusable Pouch Module.
4.2.1 System Design of Pouch Module. Fig. 12 shows the system
design of the Pouch Module. The Pouch Module receives a low-
boiling-point liquid from the Phase-change Control Module through
an acrylic rod. A reservoir dish is connected to the pouch for ef-
ficient vaporization. Because the Phase-change Control Module
heats directly under the reservoir dish and the liquid is constrained
inside the reservoir, highly efficient vaporization is realized.
Figure 12: System design of the Pouch Module.
4.2.2 Fabrication Process of Foldable Pouch. InflatableMod can
drive three-dimensional pouches in various sizes and shapes with
the same system; therefore, the pouch fabrication process is pre-
sented here. Pouches are fabricated from 0.75 mm PE sheet because
it is a lightweight and inexpensive material with excellent impact re-
sistance. The PE sheets are processed with a laser cutter(VLS3.60DT)
to produce pouches of various shapes based on geometry nets. The
processed PE sheet is then folded and sealed using a heat sealer (HS-
300). Some examples of the relationship between the pre-assembly
geometry net and the post-assembly pouches are shown in Fig. 13.
A hole is drilled in the PE sheet of the same size as the reservoir dish
for attachment to the reservoir dish. The regular polyhedron is used
for the Pouch Module in InflatableMod as a versatile shape because
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
the shape after assembly will be the same no matter which side the
reservoir dish is attached to. Because the reservoir dish is fabricated
from acrylic sheets, an off-the-shelf adhesive consisting mainly of
silylated urethane resin, which can bond acrylic and polyethylene,
is used.
Figure 13: Fabrication of polyhedral pouches: development
view and assembly drawing. Polyhedral pouches are used as
a versatile shape because the shape after assembly will be
the same no matter which side the reservoir dish is attached
to.
4.3 Untethered and Reconfigurable
Multi-inflatable Design
This subsection describes a wireless network that enables unteth-
ered and reconfigurable multi-inflatable systems.
4.3.1 Layout configure of multi-inflatable system. As shown in
the left of Fig. 14, most existing multi-inflatable systems require
a tube and an active valve for each inflatable structure to inflate
separately. This makes the tubes and valves bulky and limits the
location of the inflatables in the layout. In addition, because large
air compressors or conventional pneumatic pumps are usually used
as the driving source, the overall system tends to take up large
spaces. To eliminate these challenges, InflatableMod enables an
untethered multi-inflatable system, as shown in the right of Fig. 14.
By embedding a low-power multi-connected wireless design,
each inflatable system using InflatableMod can be synchronized.
This allows for an untethered multi-inflatable system. Conventional
multi-inflatable control was synchronized by attaching tubes and
connectors to each pouch, which limited the layout and raised
concerns about leakage between the connections of each inflatable.
In contrast, InflatableMod can be reconfigured to freely change its
placement because it synchronizes individual inflatables wirelessly.
This also eliminates the need to consider leakage between each
inflatable connection. Furthermore, in a multi-inflatable system,
each inflatable is driven independently, so there are no restrictions
in controlling any inflatable. In other words, when using multi-
inflatable with 𝑛 inflatables, the number of 2𝑛 states can be created
in one step from a state where all pouches are deflated.
Figure 14: Layout configuration of the multi-inflatable sys-
tem. (Left) Layout of a conventional multi-inflatable system.
(Right) Layout of the proposed multi-inflatable system with
InflatableMod.
4.3.2 System design of wireless communication. Fig. 15 shows the
system design of wireless communication. The control signal is
sent from user equipment, such as smartphones, to the base station.
The data is then aggregated at the base station and sent to each
InflatableMod. This mechanism allows each module to be easily
controlled from a smartphone. Wi-Fi is used as the communication
between the user equipment and the base station. Communication
between the base station and each module uses a proprietary radio
protocol based on nRF24L01+ for low power consumption, low
latency, and multiple connections. The nRF24L01+ can program-
matically control output power to suit the application. Even when
transmitting at 0 dBm, the highest output state, it consumes only
about 12 mA. This is lower power consumption than that of a sin-
gle LED. It can also generate networks arranged in a tree topology,
allowing up to 3125 modules to communicate in both directions,
so there is no limit to the number of inflatables in the wireless
function.
4.4 User Interface
For the user interface of InflatableMod, we describe the GUI func-
tions below.
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
Figure 15: System design of wireless communication for the
untethered and reconfigurable multi-inflatable system.
The GUI is designed to be intuitive and controlled from a smart-
phone as user equipment. Assuming no hardware dependency, this
GUI software is implemented using an IoT platform called Blynk.
Fig. 16 shows the GUI screen that controls InflatableMod. The
GUI consists of three main functions. (a)The first is an individual
pump calibration function that sets the upper limit of voltage ap-
plicable to the pump in each InflatableMod. (b)The second is an
individual pump operation function of each InflatableMod. (c)The
third is an individual heating operation function of each Inflatable-
Mod. When using it, users can determine the maximum voltage
of each pump, and then drive any pump at the desired output as
needed. Then, operate the heating function when inflating any mod-
ule. The UI design allows visual control of pump output and heating
output from 0 to 100%. In Fig. 16, 8 modules can be controlled, but
the number of modules can be increased or decreased as desired.
Figure 16: InflatableMod GUI: (a) individual pump calibration
function, (b) individual pump operation function, and (c)
individual heating operation function.
5 EV ALUATION
In this section, we describe the evaluation of the basic performance
of the inflatable system using InflatableMod, as well as the evalua-
tion of the quietness and continuous operation time, which are the
features of InflatableMod.
5.1 Inflating Size
InflatableMod can dynamically vaporize the required amount of low-
boiling-point liquid, which allows inflating control in the middle
range. The relationship between the volume of the injected low-
boiling-point liquid and the volume of gas after the phase change is
presented in Fig. 17. In this experiment, Novec 7000 with a boiling
point of 34◦C was used as the low-boiling-point liquid. This result
indicated that the gas volume increased linearly with the amount
of Novec 7000 injected. The pouch did not reach its expansion
limit in all the experimented trials. Thus, InflatableMod can create
an inflating size in the intermediate state. Further, even when the
pouch is fully inflated, the changes in volume can dynamically
control the stiffness of the pouch surface, thereby expanding the
possibilities for application.
Figure 17: Relationship between volume of injected low-
boiling-point liquid and volume of gas after the phase
change.
5.2 Inflating Time
For the relationship between inflating time, we conducted experi-
ments by comparing three different methods. The first method is to
heat the low-boiling-point liquid in a pouch from outside the pouch
by a Peltier device, similar to existing liquid-to-gas phase change
actuators. The second method involves storing a low-boiling-point
liquid in a reservoir dish and heating the reservoir dish directly
using a Peltier device. This method is proposed method 1. The third
method is to add drops of low-boiling-point liquid in addition to
the second method. The third method uses a reservoir dish as in
the second method, and low-boiling-point liquid is dripped into
the dish little by little. This method is proposed method 2. In this
experiment, Novec 7000 was used as the low-boiling-point liquid.
A comparison of the inflating time results from these three meth-
ods is shown in Fig. 18. Five measurements were taken for each of
the three approaches when the injection of low-boiling-point liquid
was 0.6 ml and 1 ml, respectively, and the results are shown as
box-and-whisker plots. These results shows that the inflating time
can be reduced by arranging the reservoir dish so that the liquid
is placed only at the heating point. In addition to this approach,
it has also been established that dropping the low-boiling-point
liquid slightly reduces the volume of the liquid per heated surface,
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
resulting in faster vaporization. This novel approach of structural
geometry and heating control alleviates one of the difficulties of
conventional liquid-to-gas phase change actuators, namely, the
operating speed.
Figure 18: Relationship between three phase-change methods
and inflating time.
Moreover, it is also indicated that the inflating time is indepen-
dent from the number of inflatables because each inflatable is driven
separately. The inflating time depends on the capacity of each indi-
vidual pouch module.
This result indicates that the inflating time does not increase
with the number of inflatables when creating multi-inflatables. As
the system is highly scalable, it has significant potential for various
applications.
5.3 Deflation Time
As described in 3.3, there are two major deflation methods. The
first is deflation using phase change from gas to liquid, and the
second is deflation using self-weight and negative pressure. Here,
we analyze the deflation time of these two methods. For the first
type of deflation using phase change, the time from the inflated
state to the deflated state was about 20 minutes. The experiment
uses a Pouch Module of approximately 43 mm cubic in size at a
room temperature of 20°C. For the second type of deflation using
self-weight and negative pressure, as shown in the application of
the biomimetic actuator, the self-weight causes the pouch to deflate
in a short period of time. The actual deflation time is determined
by the weight of the self-weight and the size of the Pouch Module.
Based on these results, the proposed InflatableMod can be used
in two ways. One is to deflate slowly, and the other is to deflate
immediately, depending on the application.
5.4 Silent Performance
We evaluate how quiet the InflatableMod is compared to conven-
tional pneumatic systems that use air compressors or pneumatic
pumps. We measure the noise level of InflatableMod during the
phase change when the module creates a liquid flow. Each measure-
ment was performed in a room with a noise level of approximately
35 dB.
When the InflatableMod was driven, no change in noise level oc-
curred. Generally, the standard for silent notation is 35 dB; therefore,
there is no noise when the InflatableMod is driven. Subsequently,
the noise level was measured when the air was released from an
air compressor maintained at 0.3 MPa. The noise level was approx-
imately 56 dB when releasing air and about 70 dB when the air
compressor stored compressed air in the air tank. This noise level
is comparable to the interior of a passenger car or the chirping
of cicadas, and it can be considered quite noisy. Furthermore, the
driving noise of a tube pump (G328) and a diaphragm pump (R385),
which are commonly used as compact and palm-sized pumps for
tabletop-sized pneumatic systems, were measured to be approxi-
mately 55 dB and 56 dB, respectively. The above results indicate
that the existing pneumatic system has a high noise level when
driven.
Based on these results, the InflatableMod has a high potential for
applications in quiet environments and as biomimetic actuators.
5.5 Continuous Mobile Operation Time
We evaluated how long the InflatableMod could run on battery
power. The InflatableMod uses a 2-cell lithium polymer battery.
We experimented with the time when the EHD pump and Peltier
element were running; therefore, the voltage did not fall below
3.0-3.2 V per cell to avoid over-discharging. The running time with
a 2-cell 250mAh lithium polymer battery was approximately 24
min, 34 min with a 2-cell 360 mAh lithium polymer battery, and
1h and 11 min with a 2-cell 600 mAh lithium polymer battery. The
actual time required to inflate once using InflatableMod is as shown
in the results of Section 5.2, so it can be inflated many times and is
sufficient for mobile use. This result indicates that InflatableMod
can be driven standalone for a long time. Therefore, they can be
used in a mobile environment and increase application’s versatility.
6 APPLICATIONS
There are a number of situations that can only be realized with
InflatableMod. In this section, we present four application scenarios
using InflatableMod.
6.1 Reconfigurable Inflatable Lamp
Many existing pneumatic systems are not designed to be disassem-
bled frequently; therefore, once the system is assembled, it takes a
lot of time to reconfigure it. It is also challenging to rebuild existing
liquid-to-gas phase change actuators once the liquid is sealed in-
side the pouch. InflatableMod can be used to create reconfigurable
inflatable objects. InflatableMod is divided into Phase-change Con-
trol Module and Pouch Module so that users can freely change the
shape of the Pouch Module.
Based on the above features, Fig. 19 shows a reconfigurable
inflatable lamp that inflates and lights up and can be freely changed
in shape according to user’s mood. It is suitable for use in quiet
places such as libraries or bedrooms. Furthermore, the inflatable
lamp takes advantage of the long-time deflation feature of the phase
change from gas to liquid. Application scenarios can be envisioned,
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
such as studying until the inflatable lamp deflates, like a physical
timer that adapts to the natural environment. It can be used in quiet
work and living situations, such as a light for studying or for a nap.
Figure 19: Reconfigurable inflatable lamp. (A) Pouch mod-
ules come in a variety of shapes and sizes. (B) Various in-
flatable objects can be created dynamically by replacing the
Pouch Module reconfigurably. (C) (D) Reconfigurable inflat-
able lamp inflates and lights up.
6.2 Continuous data physicalization on a map
Fig. 20 shows continuous inflatable data physicalization on a map.
It is possible for the user to arrange multiple InflatableMod in any
two-dimensional array and cover them with a map sheet. This
allows the map to be visualized in 2.5 dimensions by inflating mul-
tiple InflatableMod to match the altitude of each terrain. It further
shows the advantage of InflatableMod, which allows inflation in
intermediate states. A pouch can be inflated to the desired volume
by feeding low-boiling-point liquid into it. Users can decide where
to place the InflatableMod and how much volume to inflate. As
a result, it is easy to visualize other maps in 2.5 dimensions. In
addition to being able to be used repeatedly, this application could
potentially be used as an educational tool in the future.
Figure 20: Continuous data physicalization on a map. (A)
Multiple InflatableMod are placed in any two-dimensional
location. (B) Cover with a map sheet. (C) By inflating multi-
ple InflatableMod for each terrain altitude, the map can be
visualized in 2.5 dimensions.
6.3 Dynamically Arrangeable Inflatable Stand
Fig. 21 shows a dynamic arrangement inflatable stand. This inflat-
able stand consists of a small modular robot, toio [49], attached to
the underside of the InflatableMod. Therefore, each module can be
moved dynamically, and can be used with the advantage of being
untethered by tubing and can be placed anywhere. Scattered mod-
ules gather together in response to the size of various objects to
generate an inflatable stand. Since it is combined with the modular
function, it can be dynamically generated as a stand for objects of
various sizes by arranging each module. Furthermore, the inflat-
able structure maintains its softness, so it can be used for many
objects, including fragile items such as wine glasses or precision
machineries. The internal air pressure of the pouch also depends on
the pressure of the EHD pump; the InflatableMod pouch pressure
is about 8 kPa maximum per pouch, and the output intensity can
be controlled. By combining several numbers of InflatableMod, the
load is distributed and can withstand loads of much more than
8 kPa.
Figure 21: Dynamically arrangeable inflatable stand. (A) Each
module moves dynamically. (B) Each module arranges dy-
namically. (C) (D) InflatableMod becomes inflatable stands
that adapt to the size of different objects.
6.4 Silent Biomimetic Soft Actuator
Fluid-based actuators are often used as biomimetic actuators owing
to their soft motion characteristics. However, those general pneu-
matic systems are often noisy, which hinders soft motion. Existing
liquid-to-gas phase change actuators have problems driving soft
actuators because they are limited in the size of inflation and cannot
be controlled in continuous states. The proposed biomimetic soft
actuator using InflatableMod can operate silently and untethered,
enabling the expression of movements unique to living organisms.
Therefore, it is very compatible with biomimetic actuators.
Fig. 22 shows a silent biomimetic soft actuator made using In-
flatableMod. It expresses the soft movement of a butterfly. Because
the actuator is driven silently, it does not interfere with the natural
movement of the butterfly. When the wings of a butterfly rise, they
move slowly in conjunction with inflation, and when the wings of
a butterfly fall, they move quickly in conjunction with deflation
using their self-weight and negative pressure. Here, the butterfly’s
wings are the self-weight. This inflection of the movement of the
wings creates the reality of the butterfly’s wing movement.
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
Figure 22: Silent biomimetic soft actuator. (A) The wings of a
butterfly rise of inflation. (B) The wings of a butterfly rise of
deflation using self-weight and passive pressure.
7 DISCUSSION
In this section, we first describe the durability of the InflatableMod,
then the safety of using high voltage and dielectric liquids in the
proposed system, followed by a summary of leakage for liquids
and gases. Finally, the limitations and future work of the proposed
system are presented.
7.1 How Long Will It Last
InflatableMod consists of a Phase-Change Control Module and
Pouch Module. The Pouch Module, which inflates into various
shapes, is reconfigurable. Therefore, even if the pouch is damaged,
it can be used repeatedly by easily replacing the Pouch Module. For
the EHD pump used in the Pump Unit of the Phase-Change Control
Module, metallic materials are more suitable than non-metallic
electrodes for the electrode material in terms of operational stability
and lifetime[7]. Therefore, we used copper as the electrode material
because of its high availability and ease of fabrication. The EHD
pump of the proposed system fabricated with copper electrodes can
operate continuously for hours. Once the pump is fabricated, it can
be used for months. Even if the EHD pump is damaged, it can be
replaced since the Control Unit and the Pump Unit are connected by
magnets. This implies that the entire system can be used repeatedly
without having to be rebuilt.
7.2 Safety of the Proposed System Utilizing
High Voltage and Dielectric Liquid
When designing new interfaces, it is essential to consider their
effects on the human body. The proposal deals with high voltage
and dielectric liquids for driving EHD pumps and liquid-to-gas
phase changes. The safety aspects of each component are described
here.
First, this proposal uses high voltages of 1-5 kV to drive the EHD
pump, but there is little danger to the human body from electric
shock. Symptoms of electric shock are not caused by voltage but by
the amount of current that flows through the body and the location
where it flows. According to Matsusada Precision, a manufacturer of
high-voltage equipment, 1-5 mA is the same level of shock as static
electricity, and 50 mA or more may cause death if the current is
energized. The UMHV0550 Ultra-Miniature High Voltage DC to DC
Converter used in this proposal has a maximum output current of
100 µA, which is safe enough. Considering safety not only from the
power supply but also from the EHD pump, the current generated
by the EHD pump is small in principle because the charge 𝑋 −
injected from the electrode is extremely small. Therefore, touching
the applied voltage poses no risk to the human body. Furthermore,
the proposed module is designed such that the electrodes are not
exposed, providing sufficient protection against electric shocks.
This topic is also discussed in HydroMod for hydraulic prototyping
with EHD pumps [26].
Additionally, Novec 7000 was used in the proposed system as
the dielectric liquid injected into the EHD pump for the liquid-to-
gas phase change. According to 3M, which manufactures and sells
Novec, it has no effect on the human body, even if it evaporates
and leaks into the air.
7.3 Protection against Liquid and Gas Leakage
Measures against leakage are significant in the production of in-
flatable structures. If leakage frequently occurs at a certain point,
the structure cannot function adequately as an inflatable. This pro-
posal addresses liquid leakage in the Pump Unit and gas leakage
in the Pouch Modules. First, VHB was used as the material for the
flow paths in the pump, where liquid flows and leakage is likely to
occur. VHB is made of acrylic resin with high weather resistance
and excellent sealing properties; therefore, even if it is used many
times, the adhesive strength will hardly deteriorate, and it is un-
likely to suffer from liquid leakage. In addition, the acrylic material
was sealed using a solvent-type adhesive for acrylic resin plastics.
Next, to prevent air leakage, the Pouch Module folds polyethylene
sheets and wraps them with a heat sealer to prevent air bubbles
from entering the adhesive surface. Therefore, a pouch can be used
without worrying about air leakage.
7.4 Distinction over Tabletop-Sized Inflatable
System Using Conventional Pneumatic
Micropump
In 2.1 and 2.2 we discussed the positioning and contributions of
InflatableMod compared to existing pneumatic systems. Inflatable-
Mod solves the challenge of tabletop-sized inflatables in that it
requires no external equipment, is untethered by tubing, and is
silently driven as a self-contained module. However, pneumatic
micropumps can also be considered as a pneumatically silent drive
method. Therefore, this section summarizes the distinctions be-
tween InflatableMod and micropumps. We recognize that pneu-
matic micropumps are quiet. We also acknowledge that the phase
change technique is less energy-efficient than micropumps because
it requires heating. However, micropumps have the challenge of
being tethered by tubing, which makes the entire system bulkier.
Taking the mp6 series (Bartels Mikrotechnik GmbH) as an exam-
ple, pneumatic micropumps can generally be driven in only one
direction. Therefore, to drive the flow in both directions to inflate
and deflate, a flow path design using one pump and four active
valves or two pumps and two active valves is required, as shown
in Fig. 23. This increases the number of tubing and connections in
the flow path, making the entire system complex and bulky. Fur-
thermore, while the micropump alone would drive silently, using
an active valve would generate driving noise. Also, micropumps
are generally very expensive: the mp6-gas+ (Bartels Mikrotechnik
GmbH) [43], which is also used by omnifiber [22], costs as much as
approximately e400 per one pump. If we used micropumps for each
unit of the six multi-inflatables, such as the application in 6.3, it
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
would cost e2400, which is not easy for anyone to handle. From the
above, the InflatableMod has unique advantages over micropumps
as tabletop-sized inflatables because it is easy to handle without
being limited by tubing.
Figure 23: System configuration for using pneumatic microp-
umps. (Illustrated by the authors according to the datasheet
of the mp6 micropump [43])
7.5 Limitation & Future Work
We confirmed that the untethered and reconfigurable inflatable
systems using InflatableMod are well suited for various situation,
but we also discovered some limitations that we will address in
future work.
7.5.1 Deflation time. The proposed system uses a phase change
approach. Therefore, the deflation time when using phase change
from gas to liquid is longer than the conventional pneumatic system.
Though deflation using self-weight and negative pressure improves
deflation time, here we discuss a solution for deflation time using
phase change. This can be solved by implementing a cooling func-
tion in the system. In general, a Peltier device’s heating and cooling
surfaces are reversed in principle when the polarity of the applied
voltage is changed. Therefore, we would like to consider a cooling
function that does not increase the size of the entire system by
using only the existing Peltier device in an H-bridge circuit with
MOSFETs instead of using a supplementary cooling element.
7.5.2 Requirement of an upward position of InflatableMod. As men-
tioned briefly in 3.2.1, InflatableMod has a limitation in that it has
to face upward. If users want to use InflatableMod in a wearable,
it would be limited to something that is basically in an upward
position, such as placing it on the shoulder. Therefore, in order to
enable wearable use that involves intensive movements, we would
like to consider a new reservoir dish design that prevents liquids
from spilling even if the reservoir dish is tilted, such as a check
valve inside the reservoir dish that allows gases to pass through
but not liquids, as future work.
7.5.3 Adjustment of drive temperature. In this proposal, Novec 7000
with a boiling point of 34◦C was used; however, depending on the
application, it may be necessary to drive at different temperatures.
Therefore, using Novec 7100[12], which has a boiling point of 61◦C,
or Novec 7300[13], which has a boiling point of 98◦C, in the Novec
series, the drive temperature can be changed to the respective tem-
perature. Because the boiling point can be simultaneously adjusted
by mixing the two liquids, the drive temperature can be determined
according to the application.
7.5.4 Interactivity. Because the main focus of this study was on
shape-changing in inflatable structures, little consideration was
given to methods of sensing user input. We believe that the use of
embedded touch sensors or other devices attached to the inflatable
structures will improve the interactivity of the user experience. In
addition, we would like to consider the use of HMDs in conjunction
with VR spaces. This would provide soft feedback that cannot be
experienced with mechanical tactile senses, and enable mobile use.
7.5.5 User study. This paper did not conduct a user study. As a next
step, we will plan a workshop that includes researchers, designers,
and public users. Additionally, we will explore new ways of using
multi-inflatable systems now that they can be placed freely on
the layout. Furthermore, we will discover new ways of using the
inflatable system, such as using it as a new ideation tool, because it
is possible to reconfigure inflatable objects.
8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed InflatableMod, novel inflatable modules
based on the efficient control of liquid-to-gas phase change actu-
ators, designed with a compact circuit that has a liquid transfer
function and a heating function. This modular design enables com-
pact, silent, and untethered inflatable systems, solving the problems
of existing tabletop-sized pneumatic systems that are bulky, heavy,
and noisy. In addition, because the locations of tubing and valves no
longer need to be considered, the layout restrictions that were con-
sidered difficult with multi-inflatable systems can be significantly
alleviated. Furthermore, the drawbacks of conventional liquid-to-
gas phase change actuators, such as controllability, operation speed,
reusability, and reconfigurability, have been mitigated and resolved.
Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of the inflatable system
and presented novel application scenarios. InflatableMod could be
the next step to breaking some new ground in inflatable technology.
In the wake of this paper, we hope that various inflatables will
become part of our daily lives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We appreciate Ryo Suzuki, Koya Narumi and Changyo Han for
their generous advice and feedback on this paper. This work was
supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H04882, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] Tomoki Abe, Shoichiro Koizumi, Hiroyuki Nabae, Gen Endo, Koichi Suzumori,
Nao Sato, Michiko Adachi, and Fumi Takamizawa. 2019. Fabrication of “18
Weave” Muscles and Their Application to Soft Power Support Suit for Upper
Limbs Using Thin McKibben Muscle. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 4, 3
(2019), 2532–2538. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2019.2907433
[2] Programmable Air. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://www.
programmableair.com/.
[3] Tetsuya Akagi, Shujiro Dohta, Shinsaku Fujimoto, Yasuyuki Tsuji, and Yuto
Fujiwara. 2015. Development of Flexible Thin Actuator Driven by Low Boiling
Point Liquid. International Journal of Materials Science and Engineering (01 2015),
55–59. https://doi.org/10.12720/ijmse.3.1.55-59
CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany Morita et al.
[4] Jason Alexander, Anne Roudaut, Jürgen Steimle, Kasper Hornbæk, Miguel
Bruns Alonso, Sean Follmer, and Timothy Merritt. 2018. Grand Challenges in
Shape-Changing Interface Research. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173873
[5] P. Atten and J. Seyed-Yagoobi. 2003. Electrohydrodynamically induced dielectric
liquid flow through pure conduction in point/plane geometry. IEEE Transactions
on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 10, 1 (2003), 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TDEI.2003.1176555
[6] Vito Cacucciolo, Hiroyuki Nabae, Koichi Suzumori, and Herbert Shea. 2020.
Electrically-Driven Soft Fluidic Actuators Combining Stretchable Pumps With
Thin McKibben Muscles. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 6 (2020), 146. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00146
[7] Vito Cacucciolo, Jun Shintake, Yu Kuwajima, Shingo Maeda, Dario Floreano, and
Herbert Shea. 2019. Stretchable pumps for soft machines. Nature 572, 7770 (2019),
516–519. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1479-6
[8] Yu-Wen Chen, Wei-Ju Lin, Yi Chen, and Lung-Pan Cheng. 2021.PneuSeries: 3D
Shape Forming with Modularized Serial-Connected Inflatables . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 431–440. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3472749.3474760
[9] J Darabi and K Ekula. 2003. Development of a chip-integrated micro cooling
device. Microelectronics Journal 34, 11 (2003), 1067–1074. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.mejo.2003.09.010
[10] Alexandra Delazio, Ken Nakagaki, Roberta L. Klatzky, Scott E. Hudson, Jill Fain
Lehman, and Alanson P. Sample. 2018. Force Jacket: Pneumatically-Actuated
Jacket for Embodied Haptic Experiences . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173894
[11] 3M Novec 7000 engineered fluid. 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022 from
https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/121372O/3m-novec-7000-engineered-
fluid-tds.pdf.
[12] 3M Novec 7100 engineered fluid. 2022. Retrieved March 10, 2022
from https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/104167O/3mtm-novectm-7100dl-
engineered-fluid.pdf.
[13] 3M Novec 7300 engineered fluid. 2022. Retrieved March 10, 2022 from
https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/338713O/3m-novec-7300-engineered-
fluid.pdf.
[14] Juri Fujii, Takuya Matsunobu, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2018. COLORISE: Shape- and
Color-Changing Pixels with Inflatable Elastomers and Interactions. InProceedings
of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Stockholm, Sweden) (TEI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 199–204. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173225.3173228
[15] Emmanouil D Fylladitakis, Michael P Theodoridis, and Antonios X Moronis. 2014.
Review on the history, research, and applications of electrohydrodynamics. IEEE
Transactions on Plasma Science 42, 2 (2014), 358–375.
[16] Jesse T. Gonzalez and Scott E. Hudson. 2022. Layer by Layer, Patterned Valves
Enable Programmable Soft Surfaces.Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol. 6, 1, Article 12 (mar 2022), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3517251
[17] Seiya Hirai, Tatsuho Nagatomo, Takefumi Hiraki, Hiroki Ishizuka, Yoshihiro
Kawahara, and Norihisa Miki. 2021. Micro Elastic Pouch Motors: Elastically
Deformable and Miniaturized Soft Actuators Using Liquid-to-Gas Phase Change.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 3 (2021), 5373–5380. https://doi.org/10.
1109/LRA.2021.3075102
[18] Takefumi Hiraki, Kenichi Nakahara, Koya Narumi, Ryuma Niiyama, Noriaki Kida,
Naoki Takamura, Hiroshi Okamoto, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2020. Laser Pouch
Motors: Selective and Wireless Activation of Soft Actuators by Laser-Powered
Liquid-to-Gas Phase Change. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 3 (2020),
4180–4187. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2982864
[19] Tatsuhiro Hiramitsu, Koichi Suzumori, Hiroyuki Nabae, and Gen Endo. 2019.
Experimental Evaluation of Textile Mechanisms Made of Artificial Muscles. In
2019 2nd IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) . 1–6. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ROBOSOFT.2019.8722802
[20] Donal Holland, Colette Abah, Marielena Velasco Enriquez, Maxwell Herman,
Gareth Bennett, Emir Vela, and Conor Walsh. 2017. The Soft Robotics Toolkit:
Strategies for Overcoming Obstacles to the Wide Dissemination of Soft-Robotic
Hardware. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine PP (02 2017), 1–1. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2016.2639067
[21] David Holman and Roel Vertegaal. 2008. Organic User Interfaces: Designing
Computers in Any Way, Shape, or Form. Commun. ACM 51, 6 (jun 2008), 48–55.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1349026.1349037
[22] Ozgun Kilic Afsar, Ali Shtarbanov, Hila Mor, Ken Nakagaki, Jack Forman, Karen
Modrei, Seung Hee Jeong, Klas Hjort, Kristina Höök, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2021.
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement Based Inter-
actions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1010–1026. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474802
[23] Hyunyoung Kim, Aluna Everitt, Carlos Tejada, Mengyu Zhong, and Daniel Ash-
brook. 2021. MorpheesPlug: A Toolkit for Prototyping Shape-Changing Interfaces.
In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, Article 101, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445786
[24] Yu Kuwajima, Hiroki Shigemune, Vito Cacucciolo, Matteo Cianchetti, Cecilia
Laschi, and Shingo Maeda. 2017. Active suction cup actuated by ElectroHydro-
Dynamics phenomenon. IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems 2017-Septe, September (2017), 470–475. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.
2017.8202195
[25] Qiuyu Lu, Jifei Ou, João Wilbert, André Haben, Haipeng Mi, and Hiroshi
Ishii. 2019. MilliMorph – Fluid-Driven Thin Film Shape-Change Materials
for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (New Orleans, LA, USA) (UIST ’19).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 663–672. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347956
[26] Takafumi Morita, Yu Kuwajima, Ayato Minaminosono, Shingo Maeda, and Ya-
suaki Kakehi. 2022. HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hy-
draulic Physical Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 393, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502096
[27] Kenichi Nakahara, Koya Narumi, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2017.
Electric phase-change actuator with inkjet printed flexible circuit for printable
and integrated robot prototyping. In2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). 1856–1863. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989217
[28] Ryosuke Nakayama, Ryo Suzuki, Satoshi Nakamaru, Ryuma Niiyama, Yoshihiro
Kawahara, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2019. MorphIO: Entirely Soft Sensing and Actua-
tion Modules for Programming Shape Changes through Tangible Interaction. In
Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference (San Diego,
CA, USA) (DIS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
975–986. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322337
[29] Koya Narumi, Hiroki Sato, Kenichi Nakahara, Young ah Seong, Kunihiko Mori-
naga, Yasuaki Kakehi, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2020. Liquid
Pouch Motors: Printable Planar Actuators Driven by Liquid-to-Gas Phase Change
for Shape-Changing Interfaces. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 3 (2020),
3915–3922. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2983681
[30] Ryuma Niiyama, Hiroki Sato, Kazzmasa Tsujimura, Koya Narumi, Young ah Seong,
Ryosuke Yamamura, Yasuaki Kakehi, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2020. Poimo:
Portable and Inflatable Mobility Devices Customizable for Personal Physical Char-
acteristics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 912–923.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3379337.3415894
[31] Jifei Ou, Felix Heibeck, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. TEI 2016 Studio: Inflated Curiosity.
In Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (TEI ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 766–769. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2839462.2854119
[32] Jifei Ou, Mélina Skouras, Nikolaos Vlavianos, Felix Heibeck, Chin-Yi Cheng,
Jannik Peters, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. AeroMorph - Heat-Sealing Inflatable
Shape-Change Materials for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Tokyo, Japan) (UIST ’16).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 121–132. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984520
[33] Ahmed Ould El Moctar, Nadine Aubry, and John Batton. 2003. Electro-
hydrodynamic micro-fluidic mixer. Lab on a Chip 3, 4 (2003), 273–280. https:
//doi.org/10.1039/b306868b
[34] Marianne Graves Petersen, Majken Kirkegaard Rasmussen, and Johan Trettvik.
2020. Affordances of Shape-Changing Interfaces: An Information Perspective on
Transformability and Movement. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1959–1971. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395521
[35] William F. Pickard. 1963. Ion Drag Pumping. I. Theory. Journal of Applied Physics
34, 2 (1963), 246–250. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1702592
[36] William F. Pickard. 1963. Ion Drag Pumping. II. Experiment. Journal of Applied
Physics 34, 2 (1963), 251–258. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1702593
[37] Pneuduino. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://pneuduino.org/.
[38] Axel Richter and Hermann Sandmaier. 1990. An electrohydrodynamic microp-
ump. In IEEE Proceedings on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, An Investigation of
Micro Structures, Sensors, Actuators, Machines and Robots. IEEE, New York, NY,
USA, 99–104.
[39] Vanessa Sanchez, Christopher Payne, Daniel Preston, Jonathan Alvarez, James
Weaver, Aslı Atalay, Mustafa Boyvat, Daniel Vogt, Robert Wood, George White-
sides, and Conor Walsh. 2020. Smart Thermally Actuating Textiles.Advanced Ma-
terials Technologies 5 (07 2020), 2000383. https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202000383
[40] Harpreet Sareen, Udayan Umapathi, Patrick Shin, Yasuaki Kakehi, Jifei Ou, Hi-
roshi Ishii, and Pattie Maes. 2017. Printflatables: Printing Human-Scale, Func-
tional and Dynamic Inflatable Objects. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI
’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3669–3680.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025898
[41] Hiroki Sato, Young ah Seong, Ryosuke Yamamura, Hiromasa Hayashi, Katsuhiro
Hata, Hisato Ogata, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2020. Soft yet
Strong Inflatable Structures for a Foldable and Portable Mobility. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
InflatableMod: Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneumatic Physical Interfaces CHI ’23, April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany
(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI EA ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3383147
[42] Orit Shaer and Eva Hornecker. 2010. Tangible User Interfaces: Past, Present, and
Future Directions. Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction 3,
1–2 (2010), 4–137. https://doi.org/10.1561/1100000026
[43] Data sheet mp6 micropump. 2022. Retrieved December 13, 2022 from https:
//www.servoflo.com/images/PDF/mp6_micropumps_datasheet.pdf.
[44] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry
Pi” for Soft Robotics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[45] Ryo Suzuki, Ryosuke Nakayama, Dan Liu, Yasuaki Kakehi, Mark D. Gross, and
Daniel Leithinger. 2019. LiftTiles: Modular and Reconfigurable Room-Scale Shape
Displays through Retractable Inflatable Actuators. In The Adjunct Publication
of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology
(New Orleans, LA, USA) (UIST ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 30–32. https://doi.org/10.1145/3332167.3357105
[46] Ryo Suzuki, Ryosuke Nakayama, Dan Liu, Yasuaki Kakehi, Mark D. Gross, and
Daniel Leithinger. 2020. LiftTiles: Constructive Building Blocks for Prototyping
Room-Scale Shape-Changing Interfaces. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (Sydney NSW,
Australia) (TEI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
143–151. https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374941
[47] Shan-Yuan Teng, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, Chi Wang, Chi-huan Chiang, Da-Yuan Huang,
Liwei Chan, and Bing-Yu Chen. 2018. PuPoP: Pop-up Prop on Palm for Virtual
Reality. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (Berlin, Germany) (UIST ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 5–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242628
[48] Shan-Yuan Teng, Cheng-Lung Lin, Chi-huan Chiang, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, Liwei
Chan, Da-Yuan Huang, and Bing-Yu Chen. 2019. TilePoP: Tile-Type Pop-up
Prop for Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (New Orleans, LA, USA) (UIST ’19).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 639–649. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347958
[49] Toio. 2022. Retrieved August 30, 2022 from https://toio.io/.
[50] Yasuyuki Tsuji, Shujiro Dohta, Tetsuya Akagi, and Yuto Fujiwara. 2016. Analysis
of Flexible Thin Actuator Using Gas–Liquid Phase-Change of Low Boiling Point
Liquid. Vol. 345. 67–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-17314-6_9
[51] Ryusei Uramune, Hiroki Ishizuka, Takefumi Hiraki, Yoshihiro Kawahara, Sei
Ikeda, and Osamu Oshiro. 2020. HaPouch: Soft and Wearable Haptic Display
Devices Using Liquid-to-Gas Phase Change Actuator. InAdjunct Publication of the
33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Virtual
Event, USA) (UIST ’20 Adjunct). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 53–55. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379350.3416183
[52] Ryusei Uramune, Hiroki Ishizuka, Takefumi Hiraki, Yoshihiro Kawahara, Sei
Ikeda, and Osamu Oshiro. 2022. HaPouch: A Miniaturized, Soft, and Wearable
Haptic Display Device Using a Liquid-to-Gas Phase Change Actuator.IEEE Access
10 (2022), 16830–16842. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3141385
[53] Lining Yao, Ryuma Niiyama, Jifei Ou, Sean Follmer, Clark Della Silva, and Hiroshi
Ishii. 2013. PneUI: Pneumatically Actuated Soft Composite Materials for Shape
Changing Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (St. Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom)
(UIST ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 13–22.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502037
[54] Xinlei Zhang, Ali Shtarbanov, Jiani Zeng, Valerie K. Chen, V. Michael Bove,
Pattie Maes, and Jun Rekimoto. 2019. Bubble: Wearable Assistive Grasping
Augmentation Based on Soft Inflatables. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk)
(CHI EA ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312868