KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion 
Jin Hee (Heather) Kim Shreyas Patil Sarina Matson 
Hybrid Body Lab, Cornell University Hybrid Body Lab, Cornell University Hybrid Body Lab, Cornell University 
Ithaca, New York, USA Ithaca, New York, USA Ithaca, New York, USA 
jk2768@cornell.edu sp2544@cornell.edu sm2224@cornell.edu 
Melissa Conroy Hsin-Liu (Cindy) Kao 
Human Centered Design, Cornell Hybrid Body Lab, Cornell University 
University Ithaca, New York, USA 
Ithaca, New York, USA cindykao@cornell.edu 
mac622@cornell.edu 
Figure 1: KnitSkin is a bio-inspired sleeve that can traverse diverse cylindrical terrains, ranging from (a) a user’s forearm at 
the wearable scale, to (b) tree branches and (c), (d) pipes at the environmental scale. (e) Python inspired scales are machine 
knitted on the inside of the substrate to provide elongation for propulsion. 
ABSTRACT 
We present KnitSkin, a bio-inspired sleeve that can traverse diverse 
cylindrical terrains, ranging from a user’s forearm at a wearable 
scale, to pipes and tree branches at an environmental scale. Fab-
ricated with a machine knitted substrate, the sleeve confgures a 
stepped array of knitted scales that exhibit anisotropic friction. 
Coupled with the extension of actuators enclosed in the sleeve, 
the scales enable efective directional locomotion on cylindrical 
surfaces with varying slopes, textures, and curvatures. KnitSkin’s 
substrates are characterized by scales whose geometries and mate-
rials can be fne-tuned and channels that can accommodate diverse 
actuators. We introduce the design elements of KnitSkin in which 
we characterize a series of substrate parameters and their resulting 
anisotropic behaviors. In evaluating the locomotion, we examine 
the variables associated with the surface and actuator characteris-
tics. KnitSkin obtains diverse applications across diferent scales, 
including wearable interfaces, industrial pipe-monitoring, to agri-
cultural robots. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04. . . $15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502142 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interac-
tion (HCI). 
KEYWORDS 
Machine Knitting, Smart Textiles, Mobile Robots, Wearable Robots 
ACM Reference Format: 
Jin Hee (Heather) Kim, Shreyas Patil, Sarina Matson, Melissa Conroy, and Hsin-
Liu (Cindy) Kao. 2022. KnitSkin: Machine-Knitted Scaled Skin for Locomo-
tion. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22), 
April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502142 
1 INTRODUCTION 
While interactive devices in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 
have typically been static or fxed in one location, there has been in-
creased interest in mobile devices which can change their locations. 
This includes a range of on-body robots [12–14, 33], which can 
climb on clothing, as well as locomotion and swarm robots [37, 62] 
that can travel on fat ground and vertical surfaces. However, little 
research has investigated mechanisms for climbing on cylindrical 
surfaces. Cylindrical terrains, such as the forearm at the wearable 
scale to pipes, lamp posts, and tree branches at the environmental 
scale, are widely situated in our daily lives. Mobile robots that can 
climb on these various cylindrical terrain have the potential to yield 
new applications from health rehabilitation, industrial monitoring, 
to urban and agricultural robots. A prime challenge has been a 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
compliant robot form factor that can conform to the geometry of a 
cylindrical surface while propelling upward. 
We introduce KnitSkin, an entirely soft and coordinated system 
that can climb up underexplored cylindrical surfaces. Embodied 
in a sleeve, the coordinated locomotion system is composed of 
pneumatic actuators that dominate propulsion and a conformable 
substrate that exhibits anisotropic friction via a stepped array of 
knitted scales. The substrate can integrate a comprehensive range 
of actuators in a minimally intrusive manner. Taking inspiration 
from limbless locomotion often seen in earthworms and leeches, 
the actuators linearly extend to enable global propulsion of the 
sleeve. The fexible substrate accommodates local elongation of the 
actuators and translates them into a globally coordinated locomo-
tion. Mimicking the skin of certain limbless terrestrial organisms 
such as the scale of pythons and "setae" of earthworms, the sub-
strate features tunable attributes such as frictional “scales” to direct 
movement and bolster propulsion. Particularly prominent in Knit-
Skin is a simple and universal locomotion strategy: the form factor 
that lets locomotion defy gravity by providing normal force, yet ac-
commodating dynamic movements. With computationally tunable 
structures, KnitSkin enjoys the freedom of integrating diverse actua-
tors regardless of mechanism, orientation and shapes. The resulting 
KnitSkin sleeve can crawl on cylindrical surfaces to passively adapt 
to terrain variations without active control. 
In this paper, we introduce the fabrication and mechanical pa-
rameters of the knit substrates. We then evaluate the performance 
of KnitSkin in which locomotion is expressed as a function of dif-
ferent attributes of the substrate parameters and terrain. Drawing 
from the results, we present various applications in which KnitSkin 
is envisioned in a wide range of surfaces serving various purposes. 
By enabling locomotion using soft textile-based fabrication meth-
ods, we present a novel mode of traversal that can extend to the 
human body, pipes or arboreal environments. Our contributions 
include: 
• We introduce computational knitting and linear extension 
as a locomotion strategy to generate a sleeve-like soft robot 
that can traverse an uncharted class of terrain: cylindrical 
surfaces. Our soft approach is compatible with a variety of 
terrain attributes: material, slope, and curvature. 
• We characterize material and geometric attributes of the knit 
substrate with regard to anisotropic friction. We evaluate 
terrain variations as main determinants for locomotion. In 
evaluating the locomotion, we investigate: (1) the impact of 
terrain materials, (2) the efect of the number of actuators 
on locomotion, and (3) the impact of terrain attributes such 
as slope and curvature on locomotion. 
• Building upon the results, we introduce applications of Knit-
Skin encompassing a variety of scales and surfaces, ranging 
from the human body, industrial pipes to arboreal environ-
ments. 
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
2.1 Bio-Inspired Locomotion 
Locomotion strategies in nature adopt a wide range of mechani-
cal tactics to traverse a variety of extreme spaces. Modeling after 
nature, attempts in robotics to navigate various uneven surfaces 
[32, 35, 51, 71] and confned spaces [10, 28] have been enabled by 
hardware that mimics frogs, geckos, cockroaches, or ivy vines. For 
instance, frog feet have inspired robotic suction cups [71] which 
can climb walls while consuming low energy. Gecko’s sticky pads 
have led to the development of adhesive appendages [42] which 
assist robots to climb vertically and turn at 90 degree surfaces. The 
body motion and compressibility of cockroaches have been studied 
in legged robots to mimic rapid locomotion in crevices. Likewise, 
plants ofer inspirations that are unique to their growth-based nav-
igation. For example, vines have inspired a variety of robots that 
can navigate congested and confned spaces [10, 28, 30, 67, 68]. 
Nonetheless, designed for on-ground operation, such technologies 
are not known to be compatible with cylindrical surfaces, and nor 
have they been evaluated with various terrain attributes. In the 
limited number of studies that have proposed locomotion strategies 
for pole-like structures, a series of discrete modules [25] or grippers 
[36] were among popular methods to enable efective gait patterns. 
Grippers in particular have proven robust on not only irregular tree 
trunks [36] but even on an overhanging wall [50]. However, they 
require rigid mechanical units for actuation. In this work we aim 
to investigate opportunities for a soft locomotion system. 
Most relevant to this research is the locomotion in limbless or-
ganisms such as snakes, earthworms and caterpillars. Due to the 
absence of appendages to support dynamic motion, these organ-
isms have evolved to make the best use of skin and muscle. Their 
skins stretch and shrink synchronously with the muscle movement, 
which aids or hinders the body to protrude forward. For instance, 
earthworms present “setae” on their skins which anchors the animal 
in the soil and prevents backsliding. The same is true for scales in 
snakes. Taking inspiration from snake scales, Rafsanjani et al. [52] 
explained how adding a skin of stretchable kirigami could help soft 
actuators crawl. Kirigami substrates coupled with fber-reinforced 
soft actuators allowed the skin to pop up, turning isotropic friction 
into anisotropic friction. While the stick-slip system was proven ef-
fective on rough surfaces where the skin can enhance anchoring, it 
ofers little applicability for the specifc terrain that we target in this 
paper. Likewise, the segmentation of muscle in leeches, inchworms 
and caterpillars have inspired a range of soft robots [6, 15, 63, 64]. 
While professed as terrestrial locomotion, few advances in loco-
motion technology in the robotic feld are scalable or applicable to 
cylindrical terrains. As an exception, Agharese et al. [1] developed 
a vine-inspired robot that wraps around the human arm for haptic 
feedback. However, the tip-extending strategy is far from the no-
tion of mobile interface. Taking inspiration from nature, KnitSkin 
takes broad attributes of cylindrical terrain into account, laying the 
groundwork for scalable applications from relocatable wearable 
interfaces to industrial and agricultural robots. 
2.2 Deformable Fabric-Based Interfaces 
Methods to animate fabric-based interfaces have been extensively 
studied in HCI. Diferent actuation mechanisms have been devel-
oped to stimulate the shape-changing efects, which can be catego-
rized into structural and local deformation. Structural deformation 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
through yarn or fber has been enabled chiefy by knitting engi-
neered materials into the fabric [31, 55, 56]. Integration of the mate-
rials prompts global deformation for applications in garment com-
pression [27], heat insulation [65], or even artistic expression [60]. 
However, with known demerits of insufcient force, irreversibility, 
and lack of local tunability, such applications have yet to be used 
for performing locomotion on the human body. 
Local deformation, on the other hand, enjoys a wider variety of 
mechanisms from SMA, bi-layer, to pneumatics. Inducing shape-
change through SMA has been welcomed thanks to the material’s 
compliant and compact form factor. Contrasted with the earlier 
bracket, the material is now enclosed into local parts of the inter-
face through sewing or couching [8, 43, 73, 74], weaving [61], 3d 
printing [41] or layering [2]. Some applications encompass spe-
cifc purposes from donning and dofng assistance [38], meditation 
[22], hypotension treatment [26] to autistic spectrum therapy [16]. 
Other applications of SMA serve a range of on-body haptic applica-
tions [2, 23, 29, 34, 61] or rather all-around purpose [41]. Despite 
the prominent uses in creating local transformation, SMA has not 
been popularized for locomotion due to its lack of sufcient force 
for propulsion and irreversibility. Alternatively, shape-change of 
fabrics can also be achieved by stacking materials with dissimi-
lar responsiveness to stimuli. Deformation through such bi-layer 
compositions enjoys more complaint materials, such as flms [70] 
and polymer composites [54]. Transformation takes place as the 
diferential of responsive and inert materials modulates expansion 
and contraction. While shape change through bi-morph has proven 
to be rapid and precise, it has not been adopted for locomotion ap-
plications due to insufcient force and slow recovery. Overcoming 
the lack of force and slow actuation cycle, more controlled shape 
change is yielded by combining pneumatics and fabrics. In many 
studies, soft pneumatic actuators that are enfolded by knit fabrics 
have demonstrated ability to bend, extend, and rotate, which aided 
precise control hand motion. Resulting applications lent themselves 
to efective tools for rehabilitation [11, 44–47, 49, 53, 58, 59]. Nev-
ertheless, few pneumatic-based applications have sought purposes 
beyond rehabilitation. While serving a diferent purpose from Knit-
Skin, the versatile use of knits in conjunction with soft pneumatics 
inspires our investigations. The stretchability that is unique to knit 
textiles and no other fabric structures is an important enabling prop-
erty for KnitSkin’s locomotion. On the whole, an ample history of 
fabric-based shape change has demonstrated extensive utility and 
compatibility with various materials. However, despite their ability 
to embrace diverse materials and actuators, deformable fabrics have 
yet to be used for locomotion technologies, to which this work aims 
to contribute. 
2.3 Wearable Robots for Locomotion 
Wearable robots, which explore an alternative terrain to tabletop 
surfaces [37, 62], bring locomotion onto the human body. While 
some robots assist with body-location specifc tasks, such as on-
body fabrication [9] or kinematic movement [40, 72], others are 
mobile and able to maneuver on clothes or skin. While early work 
has been centered on the engineering facets of cloth-climbing robots 
[7, 24, 39], recent work has also demonstrated HCI applications 
[12, 13, 33]. Rovables [13] and KINO [33] use magnetic wheels 
to climb clothes, demonstrating applications from healthcare, re-
mote communication, to fashion expression. While cloth-climbing 
robots have enabled new interaction possibilities, attempts to move 
directly on skin remain limited. Epidermal Robots [12] uses a skin-
suction mechanism embedded in a legged robot to grasp and move 
up the skin surface. However, the hardware-centric approach suf-
fers from challenges such as sagging of skin and unreliable cup-skin 
seal on curved body locations. Designed for the arm, Movelet [14] 
is a motor-driven bracelet that can move up and down the arm for 
haptic feedback. However, the weight of the device and reliance on 
adhesive tape constrain the position of arm. 
KnitSkin explores a “soft” approach for locomotion, especially 
taking advantage of knit substrates which have demonstrated con-
formability not only to curved and challenging body locations [34], 
but even to diverse terrains in natural [21] and man-made environ-
ments [18, 19]. 
3 KNITSKIN 
The overarching principle of KnitSkin’s crawling motion lies in 
the linear extension-recovery and interfacial friction between the 
knit substrate and underlying surface (Figure 2). Hence, the perfor-
mance is jointly determined by the textures of cylindrical surfaces 
and the attributes of KnitSkin interface. KnitSkin adopts actuators 
and encloses them in channels to enable local elongation. Leverag-
ing fexibility in the knit substrate, the local extension is in turn 
transferred globally, elongating the entire KnitSkin structure longi-
tudinally. Here we identify design elements of KnitSkin and their 
role in delivering coordinated locomotion. 
3.1 Producing Knit Substrates for Frictional 
Anisotropy 
The knit substrates are fabricated on a digital v-bed knitting ma-
chine, SRY 123 SHIMA SEIKI. The knit substrates play two pri-
mary roles in KnitSkin: (1) afording frictional anisotropy and (2) 
serving as an enclosure for actuators. Anisotropy is a property of 
having directional dependency. In this paper, we pursue frictional 
anisotropy, which means the knit substrate will produce the least re-
sistance when being pushed towards a certain direction. Frictional 
anisotropy is also a widespread mechanism behind many natural 
creatures: snake skin [69], bur-clad plant [5] or hairy legs of insects 
[5], and other animals [3]. Depending on the direction of move-
ment, angled protrusions slide smoothly or ratchet the contacting 
surface [20]. To develop frictional anisotropy, we have engineered 
a novel knit structure that marries yarns with conficting charac-
teristics of stifness and elasticity. We also take advantage of the 
vertical progression of knit in which a row knits frst followed by 
another to form a texture in a stacked manner. KnitSkin’s substrate 
is composed of three features: a ground layer, scales and channels. 
Yarns with elastic properties form the ground layer while yarns 
with high stifness and less elasticity form the scales (Figure 3). The 
channels can be knitted with either of the two yarns. The ground 
layer knits on the needles forming regular knit loops, whereas the 
scales skip the needles, leaving the yarn to run freely across the 
back of the ground layer. The scales are knitted row-wise, with the 
scale tips stacking over the succeeding rows, creating a stepped 
texture. While knitting on the machine, the ground yarn is put 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
Figure 2: KnitSkin composition. (a) The resulting sleeve, which confgures three channels with pleated actuators enclosed. The 
scales are knitted on the inside. (b) The mechanics of propulsion: during extension, the scales on the side of the head slide 
forward while the ones on the tail interlock with the surface. During recovery the scales on the tail propel while the ones on 
the head anchor on the surface. 
under tension as it is being stretched to knit on needles that are 
apart. Once the knit structure is released from the needle bed, the 
stress built up in the ground layer lets the entire structure including 
the scales draw in. This shrinkage is larger along the rows than 
columns, afecting a great amount of lateral fexing of scales (Figure 
3(c)). An adequate amount of elasticity in the ground layer and 
the stifness in the scales is crucial, as the balance between them 
determines the angled orientation of the scales (Figure 3 (a), (b)). 
For instance, if the scale yarn exhibits little stifness as in Figure 
3 (b), it is prone to generating scales with a negligible curve. We 
elaborate on each feature of the substrate below: 
• Scales: The size, pattern, density and roughness of the scales 
can be tuned with few constraints as long as the elasticity 
of the ground layer and the stifness of the scales strike a 
good balance. For instance, the size of scales can be tuned 
by letting the scales skip more needles (Figure 4 (a)-(c)). By 
arraying scales in straight columns such that no adjacent 
scales are pressing them down one can expect lofty scales, 
whereas by patterning the scales so they imbricate one can 
obtain low-rise scales (Figure 4 (d)-(f)). Likewise changes in 
the density (Figure 4 (g)-(i)) and the roughness of the scales 
can contribute to the anisotropic properties of the substrate. 
We identify detailed geometric and material parameters of 
the scales and characterize resulting anisotropic efect in 
later sections. 
• Ground layer: The role of the ground is to withstand a 
certain amount of stress during knitting. When released 
from the needle bed, the ground pulls in the scales laterally. 
The limited elasticity in ground yarns could result in little 
retraction, which in turn leads to scales that are less curved. 
When the scales are straightened up (not curved), they no 
longer stack onto each other losing the stepped texture. One 
can dampen the amount of pull-in by combining less elastic 
yarns with elastic ones or enhance the extent of pull-in by 
knitting with multiple elastic yarns. 
• Channels: To enclose a wider variety of actuators, we ex-
tend the tubular jacquard structure that has been demon-
strated by Kim et al. [34]. The structure creates pouches in 
various shapes and dimensions, however wide or thin. By 
altering tubular jacquard, substrates can accommodate dif-
ferent numbers of actuators in diferent shapes. Channels 
can be constructed in conjunction with the scale and ground. 
A variety of materials outside actuators can be tucked into 
channels through a knitted hole, without additional eforts 
for integration. 
3.2 Producing Actuators for Longitudinal 
Extension 
KnitSkin enables locomotion through longitudinal extension of the 
sleeve. While the substrates can accommodate a wide range of ma-
terials, in this paper we build upon soft pneumatic actuators from 
past literature, due to their compliance and potential portability 
[57]. We specifcally choose soft pneumatic actuators with pleated 
sheaths for their relatively high thrust force [66]. The pneumatic 
actuator consists of of-the-shelf materials: inner tubing (Super-
Soft Rubber Tubing for Air and Water, McMaster), pleated sheath 
(Expandable Sleeving Gauze Polyester Fabric, McMaster) and cus-
tom 3D printed fttings. The pleated sheath can be made out of an 
expandable braided sleeve. To form pleats, the sleeve is compressed 
axially while expanding radially. Then the sleeve undergoes heat 
treatment to secure the pleats. The resulting pleated mesh contains 
the radial expansion of the inner tubing, thus forcing the expansion 
to translate axially. 
To expand the actuators, a compressor is used with a regulated 
output pressure of 42 psi. The compressor output is fed into the 
actuators through a 3-way pneumatic solenoid valve. The solenoid 
valve is fed with 12V pulses to achieve repeated expansion and 
contraction of the actuators. The solenoid valve is connected to a 
normally closed confguration. When the solenoid valve is supplied 
with 12V, the air fows from the compressor to the actuators and 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Figure 3: Knit structure to form a scaled substrate. The notation indicates that fve needles are skipped to form a scale. (a) 
Illustrates when the scales consist nylon monoflament. The stifness of monoflament induces the curve as the ground layer 
draws in. In contrast, scales in (b) show negligible curves due to the lack of stifness in the yarn. The scales are straightened 
up, causing no "stepped" texture. (c) depicts the change in tension as the substrate is released from the needles post-knitting. 
The draw-in of knit loops induces the lateral curve of the scales. 
expands the actuators. When the solenoid valve is supplied with 
0V, the air in the actuators is exhausted through the exhaust port 
of the valve. The time period and the duty cycle of these 12V pulses 
is controlled using an Arduino controller. The 5V output of the 
Arduino is fed to a relay which switches the 12V supply to the 
actuator. A digital pressure gauge is also connected to monitor the 
pressure in the actuators. 
4 KNIT SUBSTRATE PARAMETERS: TUNING 
FRICTIONAL ANISOTROPY FOR 
LOCOMOTION 
One way to achieve frictional anisotrophy is to shape the surface 
with an array of angled protuberances. A protuberance is an obstacle 
on a surface, sometimes referred as bumps or hairs [20]. Filippov et 
al. [20] studied how protuberances can cause diferent frictions in 
diferent directions. The scales in the KnitSkin can be seen as an 
array of protuberances. These protuberances have angles because 
the scale tips stack over the scales on the succeeding rows, as 
illustrated in Figure 2 (b). 
Tuning granular details of the scale to examine their impact 
on the friction can be most efectively achieved by altering the 
parameters below. Here we lay out how the scales are formed on 
the knitting machine, and how the two primary determinants -
scale geometry and material - infuence the anisotropy of friction. 
While the two parameters complement each other, we focus on 
how geometrical parameters induce global efects across the fabric 
while material parameters dominate the behavior of an individual 
scale. All geometrical parameters presented below are based on a 
5-stitch unit, except for the scale length parameter. 
4.1 Scale Geometry Parameters 
• Scale length: The size of a scale is determined by the number 
of needles skipped between two ends of a scale. When a yarn 
skips a needle, it runs across the back of the fabric instead 
of forming a knit loop. The free strand of the yarn forms a 
downward arch once the ground fabric is released from the 
needle bed. The scale lengths tested in this paper are 2, 5, and 
11 stitches, shown in Figure 4 (a)(b)(c). Note 2-stitch is the 
smallest possible length in order for scales to curve. 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
• Global pattern: The pattern of scales infuences the behavior 
of the substrate. In the knitting process, the scales are knitted 
row by row. This process controls how scales are stacked 
and which part of a scale is weighed down. When scales are 
stacked, the tendency to roll back diminishes as the adjacent 
scales are pressing down on them. For instance, in the zigzag 
pattern (Figure 4 (e)), each scale is stacked under the halves of 
two scales on the succeeding row, yielding the most balanced 
confguration. Scales in the diagonal pattern (Figure 4 (d)) 
leaves the right end of a scale uncompressed by adjacent 
scales. The wavy pattern results in a less controlled array 
from the side view (Figure 4 (f)). Note these three patterns 
have better rollback resistance compared with the column 
pattern used in Figure 4 (a-c), because the column pattern 
has the least overlaps among the scales. 
• Density: The density is defned as the distance between two 
rows with scales. For example, a density of 1 row indicates 
the scales are knitted every other row. Figure 4 (g), (h), and (i) 
examine the densities of 1, 2, and 4 rows, respectively. Low 
density yields low anisotropic friction because it exposes 
more ground yarns, and the friction from the ground yarns 
is uniform across all directions. 
4.2 Scale Material Parameters 
While the geometrical parameters afect the global behavior of the 
substrate, the yarn material determines the characteristics of the 
scales. Figure 5 demonstrates scales knitted with diferent types of 
materials. Considering the stifness of the materials and their com-
patibility with knitting machines, we chose Nylon monoflament, 
38 AWG copper wire and silver plated multi-flament (Lumina, 65% 
viscose, 35% metallized polyester, Silk City) for our experiments. 
• Material roughness: The surface and cross-section of a mate-
rial infuences the overall roughness of the substrate, which 
in turn impacts the friction. Single flament materials such 
as nylon monoflaments and metal wires exhibit smoother 
surfaces; they have a solid cross-section, often in the shape 
of a clean circle. On the contrary, multi-material yarns such 
as silver plated multi-flament consist of a core yarn and a 
wrapper, displaying a non-uniform cross-section. The bristly 
surface of multi-material yarns, which are akin to the metal-
plated ones, can also be attributed to the incoherent yarn 
composition. Likewise, staple yarns or spun yarns which are 
composed of fbers cut to short lengths tend to have a "fufy" 
surface texture. However those staple yarns are deemed un-
suited for knitting scales as they tend to lack stifness. 
• Material rigidity: The curvature of scales is closely tied to the 
capability of the material to store tension during and after 
the knitting process. We observe that the scale curvature is 
determined by the two main facets: material stifness and 
elasticity. For instance, while the stifness of copper wire pro-
duces some degree of curvature, the lack of elasticity makes 
it prone to getting bent permanently without rebound (Fig-
ure 5 (b)). Yarns with little stifness, as well as little elasticity, 
such as Puma (80% viscose, 20% Elite, Silk City) do not get 
stressed under knitting, thus straightening out post knit (Fig-
ure 3 (b)). Similarly, materials with excessive stifness (e.g., 
copper wires thicker than 34 AWG) cannot withstand the 
stress and are likely to break during knitting. 
4.3 Resulting Anisotropic Characteristics 
The head-to-tail direction of the scales determines the anisotropy 
of the substrate; it is expected to experience the most friction with 
the movement travelling towards the tail, and the least towards 
the opposite direction. Since scales point to the tail (Figure 2 (b)), 
we can anticipate it will take the least amount of force to move 
KnitSkin forward (towards the head direction) and the most force 
to move it backwards (towards the tail). To quantify the anisotropy, 
we defne the force ratio as the force to move KnitSkin forward, 
over the force to move it backward. The ratio is anticipated to be 
below 1, and the smaller the ratio, the easier for KnitSkin to move 
towards one specifc direction (i.e., forward.) 
To measure the force needed to move the KnitSkin towards these 
two representative directions on a cylindrical surface, we attach 
the initial load on one of the two ends, and increment loads until 
displacement is observed. We frst test the material parameters 
(nylon monoflament, 38 AWG copper wire, and silver plated multi-
flament (Figure 5)) to identify the most suitable material. We then 
proceed with the geometry parameters, testing the nine options in 
Figure 4 to identify the most optimal setup. For the scale geometry 
parameter, we test three representative options for scale length, 
scale pattern, and scale density. We aim to provide initial charac-
terization of how these individual factors impact the force ratio, 
instead of an extensive full-factorial characterization. Each setting 
is tested 5 times to account for variability. Attributes of the cylinder 
and other experimental set up remain the same across the entire 
experiment for consistency. 
Our data shows that for backward force, namely when the angle 
of the scales interlocks with the surface, greater force was required 
regardless of materials (Table 1). Among the materials the nylon 
monoflament recorded the greatest gap between the head (forward) 
and tail (backward) directions. 13.6% less force was needed when the 
slope of scales was positioned forward. While the 38 AWG copper 
wire similarly produced less force of 11.8%, the silver plated multi-
flament recorded the least amount of force gap of 7.2%. Following 
the results, we chose the nylon monoflament to test the geometry 
parameters. Of the nine geometry variations, the one that yielded 
the greatest force gap was f (Figure 4). All nine variations indicated 
greater force for backward displacement. From the box plot showing 
how these force gaps were distributed throughout trials, we noticed 
that confguration g and h have contributed to larger interquartile 
ranges (Figure 6). This indicated that the reduced density of scales 
may have resulted in less consistent force when pulled forward. 
We also noticed that the density variations overall informed of an 
insignifcant gap of medians, less than 10%, which could be a result 
from a greater exposure of the ground yarn than pattern and scale 
length. 
5 LOCOMOTION EV ALUATION 
In our preliminary characterization we investigated parameters of 
scales and their infuence on frictional anisotropy. The objective of 
this study is to understand the propulsion ability of KnitSkin by 
deploying it on actual cylindrical terrains. In order for KnitSkin 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Figure 4: Geometry parameters of scales. The notations on the bottom left corner of the cells denote the numbers and confg-
urations of stitches to form scales. The dark background of the notation represents ground layer. Presented in each cell are 
resulting substrates from top and side views. 
to serve inter-scale uses it is critical to leverage its design and re-
alize locomotion on a wide subset of cylindrical surfaces. In this 
evaluation, we focus on how the individual factors below afect the 
traversal distance. The interaction between the factors is thus not 
the focus of this investigation. The traversal distance is expressed 
as the function of actuation cycle while varying: (1) surface ma-
terials (2) the number of actuators (3) the slope of terrain, and (3) 
the curvature of terrain. Unless otherwise specifed we manually 
mark the location of the tail of the interface after each cycle, while 
recording the process through an external camera. As the duration 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
Figure 5: Material parameters of scales. With the same stitch length and pattern, varying materials afects the properties of 
an individual scale, which in turn afects anisotropic friction. 
Table 1: The force ratios of pulling KnitSkin forward over pulling backward under diferent materials (demonstrated in Fig-
ure 5). A smaller ratio indicates that it is easier to move KnitSkin forward with the setup. 
Material Parameters Ratio Material Parameters Ratio Material Parameters Ratio 
A - Nylon monoflament 0.873 B - 38 AWG copper wire 0.881 C - Silver plated multi-flament 0.927 
Table 2: The force ratios of pulling KnitSkin forward over pulling backward under diferent geometry parameters (demon-
strated in Figure 4.) A smaller ratio indicates that it is easier to move KnitSkin forward with the setup. 
Geometry Parameters Ratio Geometry Parameters Ratio Geometry Parameters Ratio 
A - length.2stiches 0.917 D - pattern.diagonal 0.911 G - density.1row 0.994 
B - length.8stiches 0.889 E - pattern.zigzag 0.768 H - density.2rows 0.918 
C - length.11stiches 0.693 F - pattern.wave 0.692 I - density.4rows 0.997 
of exhaust and intake—which comprise one actuation cycle—can 
be desirably programmed, we take the actuation cycle as a unit for 
travel speed. 
5.1 Surface Materials 
The traversal distance is the result of a variety of interfacial proper-
ties involving the underlying surface materials and their roughness 
[20]. In the study we aim to inspect a wide range of materials 
through which we envision use cases of KnitSkin across various 
applicable scales. 
Procedure and Apparatus. During the test, we use a knitted sub-
strate confgured with the knit pattern f from scale parameters 
(Table 2) and nylon monoflament material, following the results 
from the anisotropy characterization (Table 1). Three pneumatic 
actuators are spaced evenly and integrated in the sleeve, with the 
pressure set at 42 psi. We use the distance that the interface trav-
els in 10 infation-then-defation cycles as our evaluation metric. 
Each cycle involves a 3-second infation and a 1-second defation. 
We repeat this for 10 rounds for each parameter except for terrain 
curvature. The slope of the surface was set at 180 degrees (parallel 
to the ground), with a diameter of 2 inches. 
The list of surface materials evaluated includes: extruded polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC), reinforced vinyl, steel, polyurethane laminate (PUL, 
75% polyester, 25% polyurethane), silicone rubber, and neoprene. 
The selected materials cover a wide range of cylindrical surfaces 
that KnitSkin can climb on: PVC, reinforced vinyl, and steel repre-
sent materials widely used in industrial applications; PUL, silicone 
rubber, and neoprene are known for similar properties to human 
skin allowing the materials to be widely used to simulate physical 
properties of the skin [17]. 
Prior to the evaluation, we use a proflometer (10x, Keyence 
VK-X260 Laser-Scanning Proflometer) to scan the surface and to 
measure the roughness (i.e., the characteristics of peaks and valleys 
on the surface) of each material. The scanned images and the 2-
point profles (i.e., the surface elevation and depression along a 
straight line) are presented in (Figure 7). As conduits which are 
extruded during fabrication, PVC and reinforced vinyl tubes present 
horizontal textures. While both PUL and steel show recognizable 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
forward backward
1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15 1.20 1.25
A
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
B
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
C
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
D
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55
E
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
F
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
2.10 2.15 2.20 2.25 2.30 2.35 2.40
G
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
H
Directions
Force (N)
forward backward
3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7
I
Directions
Force (N)
Figure 6: The distribution of force values under geometry parameters. Monoflament scales varied across diferent scale 
lengths, global patterns and density. While the medians between the forward and backward directions across density show 
trivial gaps, the medians of all variations indicate greater force required for the backward displacement. 
depressions, the ones on PUL span across larger area. Neoprene 
and silicone rubber indicate relatively shallow and small bumps. 
We use developed inter-facial area ratio (denoted as Sdr) to quan-
tify surface roughness [48]. The ratio is defned as the percentage 
of the additional surface area contributed by the texture normalized 
by the area of interest. Thus, a rough material results in a larger 
value due to the additional area contributed by peaks and valleys. 
Results. Materials with larger Sdr tended to be conducive to more 
efective locomotion (Figure 7 (a)). With the exception of silicone 
rubber, the materials with Sdr larger than 0.1 outperformed the 
rest and helped KnitSkin travel more than 110mm in 10 cycles. The 
results (Figure 7 (b)) showed that the KnitSkin travelled the farthest 
distance on the PVC cylinder. While locomotion on the PUL started 
of by outrunning the performance on the PVC, it started to slow 
down after 3 cycles. 
5.2 Number of Actuators 
Procedure and Apparatus. The knitted substrate maintains the 
pattern f from scale parameters (Table 2) and nylon monoflament 
material (Table 1). The PVC cylinder with a diameter of 2 inches 
is placed parallel to the ground. The number of actuators is the 
only varying factor in this test. The possible confgurations are two, 
three and four actuators. The actuators are spaced evenly apart 
across the circumference of the substrate. The pressure is set at 42 
psi, with a sequence of infation-then-defation cycles. 
Results. Our results suggested KnitSkin travelled farther when 
there were more actuators (Figure 8). The three- and four-actuator 
setup travelled 1.1x and 2.4x compared with the two-actuator case. 
Through a visual inspection during the test, we found that the 
four-actuator setup performed much better than the other two 
because more actuators helped transfer local extension globally. On 
the contrary, in the two-actuator case, the substrate between the 
actuators remained static, and the actuators were more prone to 
buckling. This indicates that if extension was disproportionately 
concentrated to one or two of the actuators, the local extension 
would not transfer across the substrate. 
5.3 Slope of Terrain 
Procedure and Apparatus. The knitted substrate maintains the 
pattern f from scale parameters (Table 2) and nylon monoflament 
material (Table 1). Following the results from the previous test, four 
pneumatic actuators are spaced evenly and integrated in the sleeve, 
with pressure of 42 psi. We used a PVC surface, tilting the slope 
from 20, 30 to 40 degrees. 
Results. 
We observed a decrease in the traversal distance when the 
slope became steeper (Figure 9). In comparison with the 20-degree 
slope, we observed a 30% and 50% drop in displacement with 30- and 
40-degree tilted terrains respectively. The performance degraded 
considerably when the terrain is tilted beyond 40 degrees. 
5.4 Curvature of Terrain 
Procedure and Apparatus. To evaluate if the interface can maneu-
ver on a curved cylindrical terrain, we prepare two PVC pipes (i.e., 
curved cylinders) bent by 45 and 90 degrees, with the same radius of 
9.5 inches. The pipes are placed fat, lifted 3 inches from the ground. 
We place the interface at the tangential extensions before the curve 
(Figure 10), and test if the interface can crawl and pass the curve. 
We manually mark the location of the head along the centerline 
after each cycle, while recording the process through an overhead 
camera. Similar to prior setups, the interface uses pattern f from 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
Figure 7: The efect of surface material on travel distance. (a) Demonstrates raw images of surface materials, images of the 
materials scanned with a proflometer, and 2-points profle from left to right of the arrows. We present values of Sdr as a 
roughness parameter. (b) Presents locomotion distances in millimeter by actuation cycles. 
Table 2 and nylon monoflament material (Table 1). Four pneumatic 
actuators are spaced evenly and integrated in the sleeve. In this 
test we do not limit the actuation to 10 cycles. Instead, we seek to 
observe how many cycles would be repeated for the interface to 
pass the curve and enter the tangent on the other side. 
Results. The result is expressed through manual measurement 
(Figure 10) and as the function of actuation cycle (Figure 11). In 
both measurements the result indicated that the interface was able 
to maneuver through the curves. However, the distance travelled 
per cycle was less consistent compared to the other factors. From 
the manual measurement, it took 18 cycles for the interface to pass 
the 90 degrees curve whereas 16 cycles were executed to pass the 
45 degrees curve (Figure 10). On the 90 degrees curve the interface 
maneuvered less from the 4th to 12nd cycles, whereas from the 
12nd to 15th cycles, the interface seemed to pick up speed. On the 
45 degrees curved terrain, the interface travelled more from the 
7th cycle (Figure 11). Outside these two measurements, our visual 
inspection notifed us that when the interface was passing through 
the curved region of the 90 degrees terrain, the actuator on the 
inner most arc extended of the cylinder axis; it did not conform to 
the curvature during actuation but extended along the chord. This 
created an area where few scales seemed to be in contact with the 
terrain, which could have driven the sluggish locomotion compared 
to that on the straight terrains. 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Figure 8: The efect of the actuator number on travel dis-
tance. 
Figure 9: The efect of the slope of terrain on travel dis-
tance. 
Figure 10: (a), (b) Locomotion on 90 and 45 degrees curved terrain. The numbers denote the progression of locomotion cycles. 
The intersection between the center line and the corresponding lines is where the substrate concluded a cycle. 
6 APPLICATIONS silicone rubber and neoprene, which share the properties of human 
skin [17]. Given its soft and knitted form, KnitSkin resembles cloth-We demonstrate applications of KnitSkin on various surfaces, from 
ing, making it an appropriate form factor for on-body locomotion. the wearable scale to the industrial and environmental scales. We 
In addition to the form factor, the channels’ ability to accommo-build on our insights from the evaluation section for selecting our 
date a wide range of actuators means it can be altered to create application contexts. 
a pocket for input sensors and output feedback modules. Taking 
advantage of such attributes, we envision a relocatable wearable 6.1 Wearable and Relocatable Interface 
interface that can change its location for voice input (Figure 12). In evaluating a variety of surface materials, we learned that the When the interface receives an incoming call while both of a user’s KnitSkin substrate can crawl on synthetic materials, such as PUL, 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
Figure 11: Travel distance by actuation cycle. The interface entered tangential sections of 90 degrees 45 degrees curved cylin-
ders on the 19th and 17th cycles respectively. 
hands are busy, the interface crawls down to the lower arm for 
easier voice input. In this application we modify channels to enfold 
an accelerometer for detecting the motion of both hands which 
in turn triggers locomotion. We used an open-soure, miniaturized 
portable compressor, FlowIO [57], to pressurize the actuators for 
a wearable context. The FlowIO device is connected directly to 
the actuators and is programmed to periodically infate them to 
a predefned pressure, followed by subsequent exhaustion of the 
air to produce the desired locomotion. While we demonstrate this 
in the application of an everyday interaction, we envision it can 
also be used widely for health and rehabilitation applications. Ow-
ing to the channels that can be designed to enfold a wide range 
of actuators and materials outside what is proposed in this paper, 
materials such as shape memory alloy (SMA) can be integrated to 
ofer additional functions such as compression. With the freedom 
in channel design, one can confgure lateral channels in addition 
to the longitudinal ones to enclose SMA along the circumference 
of arm. The interface would climb up and down the arm to convey 
compression on varying locations. 
6.2 Industrial Applications 
The programmability of the ground layer and scales afords the use 
of diverse and unconventional materials for knitting. By knitting in 
a strand of water soluble polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) thread to ground 
layer, we can transform the substrate into an interface that pas-
sively reacts to the moisture in the environment. We present an 
application of a pipe-leakage monitoring and protection sleeve. The 
interface can travel along the length of a pipe and reach inaccessible 
regions, and when it gets exposed to water leaks, the PVA thread 
Figure 12: KnitSkin, as a wearable interface carrying a mi-
crophone, relocates to a suitable location on the arm when 
answering a phone call. 
dissolves and solidifes the entire substrate to stop the leak. By na-
ture of PVA thread, the dissolution induces considerable shrinkage 
of the substrate, resulting in a tight grip of the interface around the 
leak location. As the interface dries it remains solid. The resulting 
interface could serve as a temporary fx for a water leak without 
requiring external sensing systems (Figure 13). 
6.3 Agricultural Applications 
We highlight how non-smooth surfaces aid locomotion for KnitSkin. 
Complying with Filippov et al. [20] and the earlier test results from 
Figure 7, we apply KnitSkin to surfaces with more conspicuous 
texture. Bark-clad tree branches ofer not only an ideal condition 
for locomotion but also a unique application space. Crawling up 
vertical trunks and angled branches, KnitSkin can serve as a soft, 
relocatable tree guard. KnitSkin could ofer a simplistic solution 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
Figure 13: The KnitSkin ground layer can be knitted with a 
wide range of materials, including water soluble PV A yarn. 
When KnitSkin travels along a pipe and becomes exposed to 
water leaks, the PV A yarn dissolves and hardens as the yarn 
dehydrates. The hardened surface of KnitSkin could form a 
protective layer on the point of leakage. 
Figure 14: By modifying channels into pockets for a portable 
pesticide dispenser, KnitSkin can further work as an agricul-
tural robot. 
to common issues with existing plastic wraps, which leave a nasty 
abrasion and can result in bark disease due to the excessive moisture 
captured inside. The porous structure of knits lets air fow freely 
through the substrate, while maneuvering with least damage to the 
tree (Figure 14). Alternatively, the ground layer could be knitted 
with insect repellent yarns [4] to protect young trees from insect 
pests which can be harmful for the tree. If equipped with a portable 
pesticide spray, KnitSkin could also serve as a minimally intrusive 
pesticide dispenser that does not spread unneeded chemicals to 
other trees. 
7 DISCUSSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE 
WORK 
Evaluation. We demonstrated that KnitSkin’s efective locomo-
tion strategy was compatible with various terrain characteristics 
ranging from the surface materials, slope of terrain, and terrain cur-
vature. In extending the evaluation, relations between locomotion 
performance and other mechanical characteristics of individual 
actuators and the fabric substrate could further be studied. This 
could include, expressing travelled distance as a function of normal 
force of the interface, or characterizing locomotion when actuators 
undergo diferent actuation strains. In terms of evaluation, given 
that it is designed as a single variate study, a multi-variate study 
could more comprehensively explain the relations among the fac-
tors. Finally, in contrast to the current manual approach of logging 
travel distance, vision-based object recognition through OpenCV 
could minimize error rate and provide more robust data. 
Locomotion on diverse cylindrical surfaces. While KnitSkin 
operates using inter-facial friction, which is similar to the mecha-
nism proposed by Rafsanjani et al. [52], KnitSkin adds one more 
crucial determinant for successful locomotion: a moderate amount 
of normal force via a conformable knit substrate, which is deter-
mined by the tightness of the interface. In evaluating performance, 
our primary focus was to keep the diameter of terrain uniform 
while having the perimeter circular to keep the two conditions 
for locomotion—anisotrophic friction and normal force—consistent 
throughout the traversal. However, as our applications and Supple-
mental Material suggest, KnitSkin can absorb a moderate degree 
of irregularities in a terrain. For example, KnitSkin can climb on a 
cracked surface with rough textures such as tree trunk, as well as 
moderately tapered terrains such as mannequin arm and human 
forearm. For future work, further exploration of a helical terrain, 
or terrains with more exaggerated bumps and depressions could 
illuminate KnitSkin’s broader applicability. To accommodate more 
challenging terrain geometries, KnitSkin should be designed with 
a control system that can perceive the terrain ahead and let the 
interface actively alter its structure. For example, KnitSkin could 
eventually be equipped with IR sensors to detect a protrusion or 
depression ahead. A closed-loop system, in which actuators com-
municate through IMUs to control strain, actuation frequency and 
exhaust/intake duration could enable locomotion against more 
challenging terrains. Further, to realize localization of the interface, 
acoustic beacons or odometry sensors coupled with an external 
camera could be explored. 
Miniaturization and improved portability. 
For improved porta-
bility which is especially important for wearable applications, the 
compressor should be further miniaturized. With pressure above 30 
psi to provide ideal strain, the existing portable compressors such 
as FlowIO [57] or other miniature air pumps [15] are incapable 
of providing sufcient pressure, compromising maneuverability. 
Although KnitSkin still can actuate under a compromised level of 
pressure, alternative actuators that can generate similar force and 
strain in comparison to the current pleated actuators should be 
investigated. 
Limitations in current system. 
KnitSkin is prone to failed per-
formance in certain circumstances. Most importantly, due to the 
nature of the friction mechanism, KnitSkin is incapable of changing 
the direction of its motion during operation. It is also possible for 
the actuation to be disrupted if the surface is characterized with 
an excessively bumpy texture or sharp protrusions that could po-
tentially catch or puncture the interface. It is also possible that 
if KnitSkin were to crawl on a surface clad with fbers that are 
aligned in a specifc direction, such as velvet or corduroy, its travel 
distance may be afected by the direction of the fbers. Also, in 
circumstances where the normal force of the interfaces changes 
due to the inconsistency in the terrain diameter, performance is 
likely to be compromised. In terms of the actuators, the rigidity of 
the current actuators limits them from bending along the curvature 
of a terrain could constrain locomotion on terrains with certain 
angles. Lastly, challenges still remain in implementing KnitSkin 
on a terrain in which either end is inaccessible. For instance, if 
KnitSkin interface were to maneuver a tall lamp post, the interface 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Kim, et al. 
would frst have to be cut open and seamed later as it wouldn’t be 
able to slide through the end that is out of reach. 
8 CONCLUSION 
We presented KnitSkin, a soft approach for generating locomotion 
on cylindrical surfaces. We introduced the fabrication of a knitted 
scaled skin, which consists of the ground layer, the scales which con-
tribute to surface friction, and the channels for integrating actuators 
for elongation. We defned the scales as the primary contributor to 
the anisotropic friction of the substrate. We characterized geomet-
ric and material parameters of the scales for realizing movement. 
In evaluating locomotion, our experiments revealed the efect of 
surface materials, the number of actuators, and terrain slope on 
traveled distance. We also qualitatively inspected locomotion on 
curved terrains. Drawing insights from the evaluation, we proposed 
applications across diferent scales: wearable, industrial, and agri-
cultural. Taking inspiration from nature, KnitSkin exemplifes the 
versatility of machine knitting in creating a unique bio-inspired 
substrate that enables underexplored locomotion technologies on 
cylindrical terrains. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project was supported by a generous gift grant from Accen-
ture Labs and the National Science Foundation under Grant# IIS-
2047249. The authors would like to thank Andreea Danielescu, Ben 
Greenspan, Aditi Maheshwari, Eric Gallo, and Taylor Tabb from 
Accenture Labs for their insight and support, and members of the 
Hybrid Body Lab for their suggestions and input. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Nathaniel Agharese, Tyler Cloyd, Laura H Blumenschein, Michael Raitor, Elliot W 
Hawkes, Heather Culbertson, and Allison M Okamura. 2018. HapWRAP : Soft 
Growing Wearable Haptic Device. (2018), 5466–5472. 
[2] Nur Alhuda Hamdan, Adrian Wagner, Simon Voelker, Jürgen Steimle, and Jan 
Borchers. 2019. Springlets: Expressive, fexible and silent on-skin tactile interfaces. 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings (2019). https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300718 
[3] Kellar Autumn and Nick Gravish. 2008. Gecko adhesion : evolutionary nanotech-
nology. January (2008), 1575–1590. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2007.2173 
[4] bartlin1227@nantec.cn. [n.d.]. http://www.nantec.cn/eproducts_detail/id/9.html 
[5] Holger F Bohn and Walter Federle. 2004. Insect aquaplaning : Nepenthes 
pitcher plants capture prey with the peristome , a fully wettable water-lubricated 
anisotropic surface. 101, 39 (2004). 
[6] Jiawei Cao, Wenyu Liang, Qinyuan Ren, Ujjaval Gupta, Feifei Chen, and Jian 
Zhu. 2018. Modelling and Control of a Novel Soft Crawling Robot based on a 
Dielectric Elastomer Actuator. 1 (2018), 4188–4193. 
[7] Guangchen Chen, Yuanyuan Liu, Ruiqing Fu, Jianwei Sun, Xinyu Wu, and Yang-
sheng Xu. 2013. Rubbot: Rubbing on fexible loose surfaces. IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (2013), 2303–2308. https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2013.6696678 
[8] Thomas P. Chenal, Jennifer C. Case, Jamie Paik, and Rebecca K. Kramer. 2014. 
Variable stifness fabrics with embedded shape memory materials for wearable 
applications. IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems Iros 
(2014), 2827–2831. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2014.6942950 
[9] Youngkyung Choi, Myung Jin Kim, and Andrea Bianchi. 2020. BodyPrinter : 
Fabricating Circuits Directly on the Skin at Arbitrary Locations Using a Wearable 
Compact Plotter. (2020). 
[10] Margaret M. Coad, Laura H. Blumenschein, Sadie Cutler, Javier A. Reyna Zepeda, 
Nicholas D. Naclerio, Haitham El-Hussieny, Usman Mehmood, Jee Hwan Ryu, 
Elliot W. Hawkes, and Allison M. Okamura. 2020. Vine Robots: Design, Teleopera-
tion, and Deployment for Navigation and Exploration. IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Magazine 27, 3 (2020), 120–132. https://doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2019.2947538 
arXiv:1903.00069 
[11] Fionnuala Connolly, Diana A Wagner, Conor J Walsh, and Katia Bertoldi. 2019. 
Sew-free anisotropic textile composites for rapid design and manufacturing 
of soft wearable robots. Extreme Mechanics Letters 27 (2019), 52–58. https: 
//doi.org/10.1016/j.eml.2019.01.007 
[12] Artem Dementyev, Javier Hernandez, Inrak Choi, Sean Follmer, and Joseph 
Paradiso. 2018. Epidermal Robots: Wearable Sensors That Climb on the Skin. Pro-
ceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 
2, 3 (2018), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/3264912 
[13] Artem Dementyev, Hsin Liu Cindy Kao, Inrak Choi, Deborah Ajilo, Maggie 
Xu, Joseph A. Paradiso, Chris Schmandt, and Sean Follmer. 2016. Rovables: 
Miniature on-body robots as mobile wearables. UIST 2016 - Proceedings of the 
29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (2016), 111–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984531 
[14] David Dobbelstein, Evgeny Stemasov, Daniel Besserer, Irina Stenske, and Enrico 
Rukzio. 2018. Movelet: a Self-Actuated Movable Bracelet for Positional Haptic 
Feedback on the User’s Forearm. (2018), 33–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3267242. 
3267249 
[15] Timothy Duggan, Logan Horowitz, Asena Ulug, Emilie Baker, and Kirstin Pe-
tersen. 2019. Inchworm-inspired locomotion in untethered soft robots. Ro-
boSoft 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics (2019), 200–205. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBOSOFT.2019.8722716 
[16] Julia C. Duvall, Nicholas Schleif, Lucy E. Dunne, and Brad Holschuh. 2016. Active 
"hugging" vest for deep touch pressure therapy. UbiComp 2016 Adjunct - Proceed-
ings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing (2016), 458–463. https://doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2971344 
[17] A. K. Dąbrowska, G.-M. Rotaru, S. Derler, F. Spano, M. Camenzind, S. 
Annaheim, R. Stämpfi, M. Schmid, and R. M. Rossi. 2016. Materi-
als used to simulate physical properties of human skin. Skin Research 
and Technology 22, 1 (2016), 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1111/srt.12235 
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/srt.12235 
[18] Manuela Farinosi and Leopoldina Fortunati. 2018. Knitting Feminist Politics : 
Exploring a Performance in a Postdisaster City. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0196859917753419 
[19] Feeldesain. [n.d.]. Yarn bombing movement art. https://www.feeldesain.com/ 
yarn-bombing-movement-art.html 
[20] Alexander Filippov and Stanislav N Gorb. 2013. Frictional-anisotropy-based 
systems in biology: structural diversity and numerical model. (2013), 1–6. https: 
//doi.org/10.1038/srep01240 
[21] Cyril Foiret. 2011. Suzanne Tidwell Knitted Trees. https://trendland.com/ 
suzanne-tidwell-knitted-trees/ 
[22] Esther Foo, Justin Baker, Crystal Compton, and Brad Holschuh. 2020. Soft robotic 
compression garment to assist novice meditators. Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems - Proceedings (2020), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480. 
3382919 
[23] Esther W Foo, J Walter Lee, Simon Ozbek, Crystal Compton, and Brad Holschuh. 
2019. Iterative design and development of remotely-controllable, dynamic com-
pression garment for novel haptic experiences. In Proceedings of the 23rd Interna-
tional Symposium on Wearable Computers. ACM, 267–273. 
[24] Peng Geng, Jia Liu, Xinyu Wu, and Wei Feng. 2018. Clothbot β : Dynamical 
Grasping and Climbing on Soft Cloth. (2018), 13–20. 
[25] Gabriel Goldman and Dennis Hong. 2008. Considerations for fnding the optimal 
design parameters for a novel pole climbing robot. Proceedings of the ASME 
Design Engineering Technical Conference 2, PARTS A AND B (2008), 859–866. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/DETC2008-49562 
[26] Rachael Granberry, Julia Duvall, Lucy E. Dunne, and Bradley Holschuh. 2017. 
An analysis of anthropometric geometric variability of the lower leg for the 
ft & function of advanced functional garments. Proceedings - International 
Symposium on Wearable Computers, ISWC Part F130534 (2017), 10–17. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3123021.3123034 
[27] Rachael Granberry, Kevin Eschen, Brad Holschuh, and Julianna Abel. 2019. Func-
tionally Graded Knitted Actuators with NiTi-Based Shape Memory Alloys for 
Topographically Self-Fitting Wearables. Advanced Materials Technologies 4, 11 
(2019), 1900548. 
[28] Joseph D. Greer, Tania K. Morimoto, Allison M. Okamura, and Elliot W. Hawkes. 
2017. Series pneumatic artifcial muscles (sPAMs) and application to a soft 
continuum robot. Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation (2017), 5503–5510. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989648 
[29] Aakar Gupta, Antony Albert Raj Irudayaraj, and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2017. Hap-
ticClench: Investigating squeeze sensations using memory alloys. UIST 2017 -
Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology (2017), 109–117. https://doi.org/10.1145/3126594.3126598 
[30] Elliot W. Hawkes, Laura H. Blumenschein, Joseph D. Greer, and Allison M. Oka-
mura. 2017. A soft robot that navigates its environment through growth. Science 
Robotics 2, 8 (2017), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aan3028 
[31] Jinlian Hu, Mohammad Irfan Iqbal, and Fengxin Sun. 2020. Wool Can Be Cool: 
Water-Actuating Woolen Knitwear for Both Hot and Cold. Advanced Functional 
Materials 2005033 (2020), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202005033 
[32] Kaushik Jayaram and Robert J. Full. 2016. Cockroaches traverse crevices, crawl 
rapidly in confned spaces, and inspire a soft, legged robot. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113, 8 (2016), E950– 
E957. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1514591113 
KnitSkin: Machine-Knited Scaled Skin for Locomotion 
[33] Hsin Liu Kao, Deborah Ajilo, Oksana Anilionyte, Artem Dementyev, Inrak Choi, 
Sean Follmer, and Chris Schmandt. 2017. Exploring interactions and perceptions 
of kinetic wearables. DIS 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on 
Designing Interactive Systems (2017), 391–396. https://doi.org/10.1145/3064663. 
3064686 
[34] Jin Hee (Heather) Kim, Simone White, Melissa Conroy, and Hsin-liu Cindy Kao. 
2021. KnitDermis : Fabricating Tactile On-Body Interfaces Through Machine 
Knitting. 2021 (2021), 1183–1200. 
[35] Sangbae Kim, Matthew Spenko, Salomon Trujillo, Barrett Heyneman, Daniel 
Santos, and Mark R. Cutkoskly. 2008. Smooth vertical surface climbing with 
directional adhesion. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 24, 1 (2008), 65–74. https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2007.909786 
[36] Tin Lun Lam and Yangsheng Xu. 2011. A fexible tree climbing robot: Treebot 
- Design and implementation. Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (2011), 5849–5854. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2011. 
5979833 
[37] Mathieu Le Goc, Lawrence H Kim, Ali Parsaei, Jean-Daniel Fekete, Pierre Drag-
icevic, and Sean Follmer. 2016. Zooids: Building blocks for swarm user interfaces. 
In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology. 97–109. 
[38] Jason Lin, Jasmine Zhou, and Helen Koo. 2015. Enfold: Clothing for people 
with cerebral palsy. UbiComp and ISWC 2015 - Proceedings of the 2015 ACM 
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and the 
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers 
(2015), 563–566. https://doi.org/10.1145/2800835.2801671 
[39] Yuanyuan Liu, Xinyu Wu, Huihuan Qian, Duan Zheng, Jianquan Sun, and Yang-
sheng Xu. 2012. System and design of Clothbot: A robot for fexible clothes 
climbing. Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation 
(2012), 1200–1205. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2012.6224620 
[40] Soichiro Matsuda and Hiroshi Matsui. 2020. HandMorph : a Passive Exoskeleton 
that Miniaturizes Grasp. (2020). 
[41] Moritz A Messerschmidt and Denys J C Matthies. 2021. ClothTiles : A Prototyping 
Platform to Fabricate Customized Actuators on Clothing using 3D Printing and 
Shape-Memory Alloys. (2021). 
[42] Michael P. Murphy and Metin Sitti. 2007. Waalbot: An agile small-scale wall-
climbing robot utilizing dry elastomer adhesives. IEEE/ASME Transactions on 
Mechatronics 12, 3 (2007), 330–338. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2007.897277 
[43] Sara Nabil, Jan Kučera, Nikoletta Karastathi, David S. Kirk, and Peter Wright. 
2019. Seamless seams: Crafting techniques for embedding fabrics with interactive 
actuation. DIS 2019 - Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Designing Interactive Systems 
Conference (2019), 987–999. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322369 
[44] John Nassour and Fred Hamker. 2019. Enfolded Textile Actuator for Soft Wearable 
Robots. (2019), 17–19. 
[45] Rainier Natividad, Tiana Miller-jackson, and Raye Chen-hua Yeow. 2018. The 
Exosleeve : A Soft Robotic Exoskeleton for Assisting in Activities. July (2018), 
2–4. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.27532.41606 
[46] Pham H Nguyen, Student Member, and Francisco Lopez-arellano. 2019. Design 
, Characterization , and Mechanical Programming of Fabric-Reinforced Textile 
Actuators for a Soft Robotic Hand. (2019), 8312–8317. 
[47] Pham Huy Nguyen and Wenlong Zhang. 2020. Design and Computational 
Modeling of Fabric Soft Pneumatic Actuators for Wearable Assistive Devices. 
Scientifc Reports 10, 1 (2020), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65003-2 
[48] A Townsend L Pagani and P J Scott L Blunt. 2019. Introduction of a Surface 
Characterization Parameter Sdr prime for Analysis of Re - entrant Features. 
Journal of Nondestructive Evaluation 38, 2 (2019), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10921-019-0573-x 
[49] Se-Hun Park, Jaehyun Yi, DongWook Kim, Youngbin Lee, Helen Sumin Koo, and 
Yong-Lae Park. 2019. A Lightweight, Soft Wearable Sleeve for Rehabilitation of 
Forearm Pronation and Supination. In 2019 2nd IEEE International Conference 
on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft). 636–641. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBOSOFT.2019. 
8722783 
[50] Aaron Parness, Mathew Frost, Nitish Thatte, Jonathan P. King, Kevin 
Witkoe, Moises Nevarez, Michael Garrett, Hrand Aghazarian, and 
Brett Kennedy. 2013. Gravity-independent Rock-climbing Robot and 
a Sample Acquisition Tool with Microspine Grippers. Journal of 
Field Robotics 30, 6 (2013), 897–915. https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.21476 
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/rob.21476 
[51] Roger D. Quinn, Alexander Boxerbaum, Luther Palmer, Hillel Chiel, Eric Diller, 
Alexander Hunt, and Richard Bachmann. 2011. Novel locomotion via biological 
inspiration. Unmanned Systems Technology XIII 8045, May 2011 (2011), 804511. 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.886413 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA 
[52] Ahmad Rafsanjani, Yuerou Zhang, Bangyuan Liu, Shmuel M. Rubinstein, and 
Katia Bertoldi. 2018. Kirigami skins make a simple soft actuator crawl. Science 
Robotics 3, 15 (2018), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aar7555 
[53] Jonathan Realmuto and Terence Sanger. 2019. A robotic forearm orthosis using 
soft fabric-based helical actuators. In 2019 2nd IEEE International Conference 
on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft). 591–596. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBOSOFT.2019. 
8722759 
[54] Michael L Rivera and Scott E Hudson. 2020. Hydrogel-Textile Composites : 
Actuators for Shape-Changing Interfaces. (2020), 1–9. 
[55] Jane Scott. 2013. Hierarchy in knitted forms: Environmentally responsive textiles 
for architecture. ACADIA 2013: Adaptive Architecture - Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual Conference of the Association for Computer Aided Design in Architecture 
(2013), 361–366. 
[56] Jane Scott. 2018. Responsive Knit: the evolution of a programmable material 
system. DRS2018: Catalyst 4 (2018). https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2018.566 
[57] Ali Shtarbanov. [n.d.]. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “ Rasp-
berry Pi ” for Sof Robotics. ([n. d.]). 
[58] Cole S Simpson, Allison M Okamura, and Elliot W Hawkes. 2018. Exomuscle : 
An infatable device for shoulder abduction support. May 2017 (2018). https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989785 
[59] Saivimal Sridar, Student Member, Pham H Nguyen, Student Member, Mengjia Zhu, 
Student Member, Quoc P Lam, and Panagiotis Polygerinos. 2017. Development 
of a Soft-Infatable Exosuit for Knee Rehabilitation. (2017), 3722–3727. 
[60] George K. Stylios and Taoyu Wan. 2007. Shape memory training for smart fabrics. 
Transactions of the Institute of Measurement & Control 29, 3-4 (2007), 321–336. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0142331207069479 
[61] Ruojia Sun, Ryosuke Onese, Margaret Dunne, Andrea Ling, Amanda Denham, 
and Hsin-Liu (Cindy) Kao. 2020. Weaving a Second Skin: Exploring Opportunities 
for Crafting On-Skin Interfaces Through Weaving. In Proceedings of the 2020 
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (Eindhoven, The Netherlands) 
(DIS ’20). ACM. 
[62] Ryo Suzuki, Clement Zheng, Yasuaki Kakehi, Tom Yeh, Ellen Yi-Luen Do, Mark D 
Gross, and Daniel Leithinger. 2019. Shapebots: Shape-changing swarm robots. In 
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology. 493–505. 
[63] Yichao Tang, Qiuting Zhang, Gaojian Lin, and Jie Yin. 2018. Switchable Adhesion 
Actuator for Amphibious. 5, 5 (2018), 592–600. https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2017. 
0133 
[64] T Umedachi, V Vikas, and B A Trimmer. 2016. Softworms : the design and control 
of non- pneumatic , 3D-printed , deformable robots Softworms : the design and 
control of non-pneumatic , 3D-printed , deformable robots. (2016). 
[65] Alenka Šalej Lah, Peter Fajfar, Goran Kugler, and Tatjana Rijavec. 2019. A NiTi 
alloy weft knitted fabric for smart frefghting clothing. Smart Materials and 
Structures 28, 6 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-665X/ab18b9 
[66] Zhongkui Wang, Takao Hirata, Takanori Sato, Tomoharu Mori, Masaru 
Kawakami, and Hidemitsu Furukawa. 2021. A Soft Robotic Hand Based on 
Bellows Actuators for Dishwashing Automation. 6, 2 (2021), 2139–2146. 
[67] Michael B Wooten and Ian D Walker. 2015. A Novel Vine-Like Robot for In-Orbit 
Inspection. International Conference on Environmental Systems July (2015), 1–11. 
[68] Michael B. Wooten and Ian D. Walker. 2018. Vine-inspired continuum ten-
dril robots and circumnutations. Robotics 7, 3 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
robotics7030058 
[69] Weibin Wu, Shudong Yu, Paul Schreiber, Antje Dollmann, and Christian Lutz. 
2020. Variation of the frictional anisotropy on ventral scales of snakes caused by 
nanoscale steps PAPER Variation of the frictional anisotropy on ventral scales of 
snakes caused by nanoscale steps. (2020). 
[70] Lining Yao, Jifei Ou, Chin-yi Cheng, Helene Steiner, Wen Wang, Guanyun Wang, 
and Hiroshi Ishii. 2015. bioLogic : Natto Cells as Nano actuators for Shape 
Changing Interfaces. (2015), 1–10. 
[71] Yu Yoshida and Shugen Ma. 2010. Design of a wall-climbing robot with passive 
suction cups. 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, 
ROBIO 2010 (2010), 1513–1518. https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBIO.2010.5723554 
[72] Xudong Yu. [n.d.]. Development of Upper-limb Wearable Exoskeleton Robot. 
([n. d.]), 434–439. 
[73] Michelle Yuen, Arun Cherian, Jennifer C. Case, Justin Seipel, and Rebecca K. 
Kramer. 2014. Conformable actuation and sensing with robotic fabric. IEEE 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems Iros (2014), 580–586. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2014.6942618 
[74] Michelle C. Yuen, R. Adam Bilodeau, and Rebecca K. Kramer. 2016. Active Variable 
Stifness Fibers for Multifunctional Robotic Fabrics. IEEE Robotics and Automation 
Letters 1, 2 (2016), 708–715. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2016.2519609 