THEME ARTICLE: PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
From UbiComp to Universe —Moving
Pervasive Computing Research Into Space
Applications
Ariel Ekblaw, Juliana Cherston, Fangzheng Liu, Irmandy Wicaksono , Don Derek Haddad, Valentina Sumini, and
Joseph A. Paradiso , Responsive Environments Group, MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
Humanity’s burgeoning crewed and uncrewed presence in space is creating
increasing opportunity for ideas and approaches gestated for terrestrial use to be
adapted and deployed in space applications. To illustrate this from the perspective
of the Pervasive Community, this article overviews a selection of recent and
ongoing space-oriented projects in the MIT Media Lab ’s Responsive Environments
Group, and chronicles the roots that most of them had in our prior Pervasive
Computing research program. These projects involve wearables, smart fabrics,
sensor networks, cross-reality systems, pervasive/reactive displays, microrobots,
responsive space habitat interiors, and self-assembling systems for in-space
infrastructure. Many of them have been tested in zero-gravity and suborbital ﬂights,
on the International Space Station, or will be deployed during an upcoming lunar
mission. Assessed together, this portfolio of work points forward to the broad role
that some of the tenets of Pervasive Computing (e.g., novel sensing technologies,
“smart materials,” and best-in-class modern HCI infrastructure) will play in our
near-term space future. This work marks an important in ﬂection point in the space
industry, where academic research experiments are rapidly maturing —on the scale
of months, not years —to inﬂuence the products, tools, and human experiences in
low earth orbit and beyond.
A
s humans and the engineered systems they
construct venture increasingly into space in
upcoming years, they will bring and send
along the technologies that evolved with them on
Earth. Space technology has become associated in
the popular imagination with engineering pushed to
extreme lengths to solve very dif ﬁcult problems, gen-
erally with custom solutions that engage limited
numbers of systems and users. The technologies
developed for space applications are assumed to be
esoteric and particular, thought as a driver for techni-
cal advance rather than vice-versa (witness, for exam-
ple, integrated circuits, which found their ﬁrst heavy
exploitation in the Apollo program and went on to
transform the electronic industry 1). Since the original
Space Race of the 1960s and 1970s, however, comput-
ing technologies and applications have advanced
enormously in terrestrial applications, and we have
seen profound impact, especially in areas where
humans contact computation, such as human –com-
puter interfaces, pervasive computing, and the Inter-
net of Things. This transformation is spreading to
spacecraft; for example, the maze of switches and
controllers dominating 1960s manned capsules and
the Space Shuttle cabin recently yielding to an array
of touchscreens in the SpaceX Dragon.
Astronauts on the Space Station rely on laptops
they bring from Earth for much of their work rather
than running on computers embedded in the space-
craft. For example, the station ’s ﬂight and systems
control computers tend to be locked into the earlier
processor generations because of the rigor of fault-
tolerance and space quali ﬁcation as well as restric-
tions put on code that can run on them, hence
1536-1268 /C2232023 IEEE
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/MPRV.2023.3242667
Date of publication 15 March 2023; date of current version 14
June 2023.
April-June 2023 Published by the IEEE Computer Society IEEE Pervasive Computing 27Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
commercial terrestrial computers (albeit they still
require some quali ﬁcation for outgassing, safety con-
siderations, etc.) can be signi ﬁcantly more capable.
Looking forward, especially as more people work in
space over the upcoming decades, the transformative
technologies under development in the Pervasive
Computing research community (such as elucidated
in the sections that follow) that people on Earth are
increasingly living with, will ﬁnd ample application in
space.
For the last 25 years, the Responsive Environments
Group at the MIT Media Lab has focused much of its
research around aspects of Ubiquitous and Pervasive
Computing. However, playing host to the MIT Media
FIGURE 1. Smart textiles for space. (a) SpaceSkin with electronics (left/center) and passive sample ﬂying outside the Space Sta-
tion [right], (b) under TVAC Test, and (c) conceptual layout for SpaceSkin strips with opposing tactile actuators for the “Sensory
Conductor” in a spacesuit arm. Peristaltic Suit layout (d) and working prototype during 0 –G test ﬂight.
28 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Lab’s Space Exploration Initiative over the lastﬁve years
has provided us an impetus to pivot many of our Ubi-
comp projects into space applications. Indeed, as our
Space Initiative and other opportunities have provided a
regular “conveyor” of opportunity2 to run experiments
on periodic zero-G parabolic ﬂights, suborbital rockets,
Space Station deployment, and even impending delivery
to the Lunar Surface, ideas we have gestated within the
Pervasive Computing Framework have been pushed
into actual space-related test and deployment. With
increasing interest in the Pervasive Community toward
space applications (e.g., the SpaceCHI workshop3 start-
ing a couple of years ago, which some of us have partici-
pated in setting up), the evolution of pervasive projects
into space is of increasing relevance. Accordingly, this
article traces several research threads and projects in
our group boosted from their UbiComp roots into Space
application and deployment. Table 1 summarizes the
key works introduced in this review, and Figure 4
includes a conceptual image of a space habitat leverag-
ing several of these capabilities.
ELECTRONIC TEXTILES,
WEARABLE SYSTEMS, AND
SURFACE DIAGNOSTICS
Dating to the 1960s, spacesuits, at least in terms of
their monitoring and control capability, were predeces-
sors to wearable computers. 4 These ideas came back
to Earth, as wearable systems and smart apparel
became a tenet of Pervasive Computing decades
later.5 Our group has been working at the integration of
computation, sensing, and fabric/material for the last
two decades in what we call Sensate Media ,6 which
bears promise for a variety of space applications. As
we have progressed from designing ﬁxed sensor nodes
on rigid substrates to dynamic nodes on conformal
surfaces, and sensing capability of fabric has improved
with better-integrated electronics, 7 it becomes
increasingly of interest to consider the fundamental
properties of the material in relation to its operating
context. Hence, we have moved increasingly toward
resilient textiles, inert silicones, and eventually more
exotic substrates as we develop such pervasive media.
This evolution is important in designing for the harsh
space environment, where atomic oxygen erosion, radi-
ation, hypervelocity micrometeoroid impacts, and
extreme thermal cycling all wear on external systems.
The International Space Station (ISS) currently
depends upon gas leak sensors, external robotic arms,
extravehicular space walks, and visual observation
for locating damage caused by debris. Indeed, in
August 2018, the Russian segment of the ISS began to
slowly depressurize. Suspicious of penetrative debris
impact, astronauts searched for external holes from
the cupola using zoom lenses and binoculars, repre-
senting the state of affairs when it comes to damage
detection on the ISS.
We have redesigned a habitat ’s protective thermal
blanket to simultaneously operate as a dense sensate
skin by weaving a variety of piezoelectric ﬁbers (which
respond to impact shock) and plasma sensing electro-
des (which detect charge created by high-velocity
impacts) into standard white “Beta Cloth ” spacecraft
wrap,8,9 shown in Figure 1(a). Following an impact
event, the skin would localize (and ideally character-
ize) damage and strategically summon optical or other
kinds of imaging free- ﬂying or crawling nodes for fur-
ther appraisal. This aerospace architecture emulates
the coordinated nature of a biological pain response
in the sense that we re ﬂexively mitigate uncertainty in
what is felt on our skin by summoning the attention of
our eyes.
ACCORDINGLY, THIS ARTICLE TRACES
SEVERAL RESEARCH THREADS AND
PROJECTS IN OUR GROUP BOOSTED
FROM THEIR UBiCOMP ROOTS INTO
SPACE APPLICATION AND
DEPLOYMENT.
In contrast to typical electronic textile projects in
the HCI community, such an augmented fabric sensor
system designed for the extravehicular space environ-
ment must eventually undergo shock/vibration testing
(for launch survival), thermal vacuum testing (for
robustness to the relevant space environment), and
ground characterization (to justify launch in the ﬁrst
place). Pictured in Figure 1(b) are two fabric swatches
undergoing thermal vacuum testing ahead of launch
to the Space Station ’s exterior walls, where one of
them is currently residing and taking data.
Once such sensate space-ready materials are
designed and well understood, they can also be consid-
ered for other applications. In this case, we have been
building out a conceptual framework called a “sensory
conductor,” in which this skin would serve as a robust
exterior to pressurized spacesuits and map external
stimuli to the wearer ’s biological skin. In other words,
this enables astronauts to feel through the walls of their
extravehicular spacesuits. A basic scheme is shown in
Figure 1(c) and described by Payra et al.,10 which details
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 29
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
preliminary tests. This work is still at the stage of a con-
ceptual demonstration with partial prototypes.
Sensate vests for monitoring cardiovascular perfor-
mance and respiration have been under development in
the wearables community since the late 1990s and
although they continually improve with technology,
some have already been productized. Applications in
space health suggest prophylactic actuation as well,
since prolonged exposure to microgravity induces
various acute health risks, including muscular, vestibu-
lar, and cardiovascular dysfunctions.11 Without the inﬂu-
ence of gravity, bodily ﬂuid hydrostatic pressure
gradients vanish, and blood distribution shifts from the
astronaut’s legs toward their upper body. Providing con-
tinuous medical monitoring and intervention for astro-
nauts throughout their journey in microgravity and after
their return to Earth is, therefore, imperative. Along with
exercising machines, compression systems such as
TABLE 1. Outline of projects presented in this article.
Project Long-term Vision Phase of development Key technical or conceptual
challenge
Electronic Textile
Enhanced
Thermal Blanket
Fabric walls of spacecraft can
track damage and sense
interstellar dust impact
Demonstrated impactor
sensitivity thresholds using
ground-based accelerators.
Sensor performance maintained
following 15-month LEO
exposureperiod
Improve mechanical resilience
of ﬁber sensors to thermal
cycling and ambient vibration/
charge.
SpaceTouch Astronauts will vividly feel touch
and texture through walls of
pressurized suits
Conceptual prototype Sleek integration between
interior and exterior suit layers
Peristaltic Suit Wearable telemedicine system
and real-time intervention for
cardiovascular deconditioning
and microgravity adaptation.
Demonstrated in a zero-gravity
ﬂight to study the effects of
microgravity and active
compression to various
physiological markers.
Miniaturization of skin-contact
hardware and their seamless
integration into a spacesuit.
SpaceShoe Intelligent dynamic foot
restraint that enables walking
on ferromagnetic surfaces.
Early electromagnet- based sole
retroﬁt tested in zero-gravity
ﬂight.
Adopt electropermanent
magnets w. intelligent controller
to anticipate gait, and low-mass
attachment surfaces.
SpaceHuman Controllable appendage for
dynamic hands-free grappling.
Pneumatic soft-robotic version
2.0 tested in zero- gravity ﬂight.
Develop automatic/guided
higher speed grappling control.
AstroAnt A swarm of AstroAnts build a
dynamic extra- vehicle sensor
network for space station,
gateway, Lunar rovers, etc. The
AstroAnt swarm can help with
inspections and diagnostic
sensing with different sensor
payloads.
Finished design and tests of the
proof-of-concept on four
parabolic ﬂights, and ﬁnished
design, development and tests of
a ﬂight hardware unit for lunar
surface testing in 2023/2024.
Efﬁcient energy harvesting
approaches, accurate tracking
techniques, and mobility on
nonmagnetic materials.
TESSARAE Scaling humanity ’s presence in
orbit through autonomously
self- assembling space
infrastructure
Prototype hardware, code, and
mission conops (Concept of
Operations) tested successfully
on two parabolic ﬂights, one
suborbital launch, and two ISS
missions
Transitioning hardware
electronics and controls from
test-prototypes to the ﬁrst
human-scale tiles for self-
assembly of a human-rated
space station.
LunarWSN Build wide-spanning Wireless
Sensor Networks (WSNs) on the
Lunar surface to study
properties of regolith in areas-of-
interest and do long-term Lunar
environment monitoring.
Finished design and tests of the
proof-of-concept.
Lunar dust impact on solar
energy harvesting and long-
term operation in shadowed
areas.
Cross-Reality
Mission
Operations
Represent all aspects, assets,
and players in space operations
through diverse mixed reality
immersion
Developed for terrestrial
environments and demonstrated
using a variety of rovers with data
from simulated missions
Reﬁne frameworks for scalable
presence and human/robot
control at various delays.
Mediated
Atmospheres In
Space
Automatically adapt the
sensorial environments of long-
term space-farers to keep them
focused and restored.
Demonstrated in terrestrial
rooms—conceptual “pods” for
space applications designed,
prototyped, and exhibited.
Prototype realistic MA pods and
habitats, test in space analog
missions.
30 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
orthostatic intolerant and passive antigravity skinsuits
have been commonly used as countermeasures.12 How-
ever, these garments do not adapt to the astronauts'
physiological and physical changes and cannot exert
controllable pressure throughout the body. Inspired by
the Peristalsis phenomena, which is the propagation of
contraction and relaxation of muscles in our gastroin-
testinal tract, we have developed the Peristaltic (PS)
Suit [see Figure 1(d) and (e)] by embedding soft, textile-
based actuators and sensors into an intravehicular
activity garment with miniaturized and wireless
sensing-actuation control hardware. 13,14 It consists of
an array of air pouches that can be individually con-
trolled for dynamic pressure or compression gradients
across the body through a wearable, compact, and
light-weight pneumatic system.15,16 It is also equipped
with multiple wireless skin-contact compression pres-
sure sensors, inertial-measurement units, and physio-
logical sensors that constantly measure heart rate,
respiration, blood pulse transit time, temperature, and
blood oxygenation level of the wearer. Incorporating
both sensing and actuation systems enables us to
FIGURE 2. Dynamic astronaut restraint systems: SpaceHuman (a) tail linkage skeleton, (b) deployed with active pneumatics dur-
ing 0–G test ﬂight; and active magnetic outsole, (c) in prep, and (d) during 0 –G Test Flight.
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 31
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
perform closed-loop intervention and study the direct
inﬂuence of active compression on various physiologi-
cal markers.
The PS-Suit platform can not only allow remote diag-
nostics and better regulation of cardiovascular health
and body ﬂuids of astronauts, but also augment their
physical training through active muscle compression,
plus provide emotional support and physical feedback
through embodied haptic transfer, as well as monitor
and prevent other microgravity adaptation health risks
such as osteoporosis, skeletal muscle atrophy, spatial
disorientation, and motion sickness. The design and
control framework of the PS-Suit will also be applicable
in other health, rehabilitation, or soft robotics applica-
tions not only in outer space, but also on the Earth in the
form of hyper-gravity(G) suits, athletic or lymphedema
compression garments, shapewear and corsets for exo-
skeletons, and surgical tourniquets. Wearable telemedi-
cine systems integrated into spacewear will ultimately
help preserve and maintain astronauts ’ and space
explorers’ health and well-being seamlessly and com-
fortably during and after long-term spacefaring or lunar
or other low-gravity operations.
For most crewed operations, it is crucial to anchor
an astronaut properly in zero-gravity —especially if
both hands are involved in a task, without proper
attachment, one hand is often dedicated to holding on
to a rail or handle. Current solutions include tethering
astronauts to ﬁxtures or attaching to foot restraints.
As our group has a long and early history of developing
shoes equipped with wireless sensors for electronic
dance and gait analysis, 17 or outﬁtted with power gen-
erating elements for energy harvesting,18 it is only natu-
ral that we had turned our attention again to shoes, but
here prototyping a favorite fantasy of science ﬁction,
the magnetic boot. Although passive magnetic boots
are commercially available (e.g., for roo ﬁng) and some
variations have been suggested for spacecraft, 19 more
conventional restraint systems have proved practical
and adequate for current space work. With new devel-
opments in space operations involving more people in
larger habitats, the time is ripe for developing new
adaptive astronaut restraint systems, and as improved
magnets and more control options have become avail-
able, we have revisited this idea. Our initial proof-of-
concept design is an outsole retro ﬁt using standard
FIGURE 3. AstroAnt MicroRover for Spacecraft Inspection. (a) standardized rover set, (b) customized set with diverse sensing,
diagnostic and servicing capabilities, (c) 0 –G testing atop various surfaces, and (d) AstroAnt designed for deployment atop the
Lunar Outpost Rover—bottom view showing thermal sensor, space-quali ﬁed motors, and magnetic wheels.
32 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
double-sided Velcro strips to strap on different types of
shoes, regardless of their size, with two powerful
remotely-actuated ﬂat electromagnets (WF-P70/9,
rated at 12 V DC each, capable of maintaining 250 N
stiction while activated) that pull against a thin mag-
netic steel strip ﬁxed to the spacecraft “ﬂoor.” We have
recently tested a very early prototype [Figure 2(c) and
(d)] on a zero-gravity ﬂight, and are re ﬁning our design
to use energy-saving electropermanent magnets (that
are only pulsed for release) and will feature an auto-
matic mode driven by sensors that anticipate that a
foot is pulling up to actuate its release, adapting gait
prediction techniques that researchers are pursuing in
smart robotic prosthetic limbs.20
Another approach that we have explored to
securing astronauts involves a strap-on robotic
appendage. These have been explored before in HCI,
for example, as extra assistive arms. 21 But in our
case, the seahorse ’s unique tail structure provided
inspiration for the overall biomimetic design that we
adopted. Indeed, among all the marine creatures
that use their tail for swimming, seahorses make par-
ticular use of their ﬂexible and resilient tail to grasp
objects in their environment. Our prototype, Space-
Human 2.0 ,22 s h o w ni nF i g u r e2(a) and (b),i saw e a r -
able soft-robotic additive prosthetic that can move
around the body to grasp objects and handles in
microgravity through an object tracking camera, pro-
tecting the wearer from injuries that might occur
while ﬂoating in a con ﬁned habitat, while providing
an adaptable and kinematically stable base. Space-
Human 2.0 , has been developed via different compu-
tational design methods, and tested at a basic level
(without active tracking) in different gravity condi-
tions (microgravity, lunar gravity, and Martian grav-
ity) on two Zero-G ﬂights [see Figure 2(b)]. Through
36 pneumatic actuators speci ﬁcally designed to be
shape-changing and bend along a reinforcing rib of
the material, astronauts and space tourists can use
SpaceHuman to cling to useful surfaces inside orbital
housings. The augmentation of human performance
through wearable soft-robotics solutions could be
integrated with fashion aspects of spacesuit design
and the architectural aspects of responsive habitat
interior design. Adapting the tail to vacuum opera-
tion would require more robust materials or a
mechanical approach.
MICROROVERS AND SWARMS
Inspired by the “Selﬁe Drone, ” a conceptual design
where a drone resting on your wrist would ﬂy up to take
a “selﬁe” photo then return to its perch, 23 we began
thinking about how robotic systems could fuse with
Wearables. This enquiry resulted in the development of
our Rovables microrobots, which were designed to tra-
verse clothing to serve a variety of novel user-interface
functions.24 The Rovables design was subsequently
adapted to serve a series of space projects starting
with a version that would traverse a net anchored to a
microgravity object of interest (such as an asteroid).
The net provides a stable infrastructure that would
allow robotic assets to reliably move to particular loca-
tions in order to conduct exploration and other opera-
tions. We have also made and tested initial prototypes
of autonomous grapplers located at several points
around the net that could grab onto surface features
and thus help to anchor it there.25
After preliminary development, aspects of this
project pivoted into a related space application
through the NASA Tech Flights program —e.g., travers-
ing the outside of spacecraft to determine vehicle
integrity and assess any potential damage. Tradition-
ally, when damage or an exterior anomaly is assumed,
a camera (perhaps on a robotic arm) or astronaut on
an EVA would be dispatched to investigate. EVAs are
complex and risky operations, however, and cameras
are limited in what they can assess, and may not have
access to the entire spacecraft.
Robots have long been used for on-orbit servicing,
such as Canadarm 2 and the ERA systems 26 that ser-
viced the International Space Station. Platforms that
apply robotic systems to implement on-orbit serving
have recently been designed and/or tested, such as
the OSAM-1 (On-orbit Servicing, Assembly, and
Manufacturing 1) for on-orbit assembly, manufacture,
and refuel, 27 and MEV-1 (Mission Extension Vehicle 1)
for repositioning satellites. 28 The on-orbit service pro-
vided by these platforms can extend satellites' life-
spans. Most of these robotic systems are ﬁxed, large,
and cost-intensive platforms. The motion of these
heavy and bulky robotic systems are coupled into the
base platforms, which makes the dynamic and kinetics
analysis of the system more complicated during on-
orbit service. 29 Smaller, autonomous robots can pro-
vide better mobility and greater functional ﬂexibility,
such as inspecting narrow spaces that are not acces-
sible or hard-to-reach for human astronauts or large
robotic systems. Building on the knowledge we
obtained from our Rovables project, we expanded the
applications of the miniature rolling robotic swarm to
space—which we term AstroAnt.
The AstroAnt [Figure 3(a)] is a miniature robotic
swarm aimed at servicing the outside surface of a
spacecraft or systems working on planetary surfaces,
such as rovers or landers, for inspection and
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 33
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
diagnostic tasks. With magnetic wheels, the robots
can attach to ferromagnetic surfaces.
Four zero-gravity ﬂights have been conducted to
test their mobility (speed and obstacle- overcoming
ability) and sensing capabilities in microgravity environ-
ments through the NASA Tech Flights (REDDI) program.
During these ﬂights [Figure 3(c)], the mobility mecha-
nism enabled the robot to reach/C24 8 cm/s on low-carbon
FIGURE 4. TESSARAE test tile, circuitry (top left) and in active deployment on a 0 –G ﬂight (top right); and on the International
Space Station (middle); conceptual view (bottom) of the interior of an assembled structure depicting several Space Initiative
projects, including some described here, in action.
34 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
sheet steel, aluminum sheets with magnetic paint, and
beta cloth simulant (in this case, with the use of a mag-
netic pinch roller on the opposite side of the beta cloth,
as in the original fabric-traversing Rovables). In a zero-
gravity environment, the robots can round a corner of
70/C14 in pitch, which ensures that they can overcome
ramps and corners enroute to an area-of-interest on the
external surface of spacecrafts, rovers, or landers.
With a modular design, each AstroAnt robot can
carry different sensor payloads, which can be tailored
based on different inspection tasks and diagnostic
missions [see Figure 3(b)]. The sensor payloads we
developed include a visual camera for optical inspec-
tions, a thermopile for contactless temperature mea-
surement, a thermal camera to obtain a thermal map
of an area-of- interest, and an eddy current sensor for
metal ﬂaw detection.
Built on this work, we designed another model of
the AstroAnt robot that will be sent to the Lunar
south pole with Intuitive Machines and Lunar Out-
post as early as 2023. This microrobot will be work-
ing on the MAPP1 rover ’s top surface, which is the
radiator of the rover ’s thermal system. Equipped
with a thermopile on the bottom [Figure 3(d)], the
robot can make contactless temperature measure-
ments of the radiator and help monitor the perfor-
mance of the thermal system.
Although there are some improvements needed,
such as better tracking mechanisms, building a mesh
network for multihop communications within the
swarm, and viable energy-harvesting approaches, the
AstroAnt robots have promising potential to support
future deep space exploration.
AUTONOMOUS ROBOTICS AND
SELF-ASSEMBLY FOR SPACE
HABITATS
Cooperative and recon ﬁguring robot swarms have
been used in various projects related to the Pervasive
Community,30,31,32 and it is only natural that space-
craft exploit this capability. We already see the begin-
nings of this with dynamic spacecraft docking and
ensemble control. 33,34 Our TESSERAE (Tessellated
Electromagnetic Space Structures for the Exploration
of Reconﬁgurable, Adaptive Environments) Project35,36
builds on this tradition via self-assembly of large space
habitats from discrete smart tiles that can be
launched in a compact ﬂat stack, thereby ﬁtting into
existing spacecraft fairings. This endeavor anticipates
the need for modular, recon ﬁgurable infrastructure in
orbit—from self-assembling habitats, to parabolic mir-
rors, to dynamically evolving multiunit satellite buses.
The TESSERAE project charts a multiyear research
effort to study, characterize, simulate, prototype, and
test quasi-stochastic self-assembly in microgravity
environments. The component tiles are tuned to
autonomously self-assemble into a particular geome-
try—in our initial prototypes [see Figure 4(a)], we have
focused on the buckminsterfullerene (20 hexagonal
tiles, 12 pentagonal tiles). During assembly, tiles auton-
omously assess their bonding status and can separate
and rejoin via applying current pulses to magnetic
joints, to form a more perfect target geometry. Each
tile, at minimum, includes a rigid outer shell, responsive
sensing and control code for bonding diagnosis, wire-
less communication via Bluetooth Low Energy mod-
ules (supporting both mesh and central-station
conﬁgurations), electropermanent magnets for dynam-
ically controllable bonding actuation, and an on-board
power management system. TESSERAE hardware has
ﬂown on two parabolic ﬂights [see Figure 4(b)], one sub-
orbital ﬂight, and two ISS missions [CRS20 and Ax1 —
Figure 4(c)] and is currently being spun out of the MIT
Media Lab for habitat-scale applications.37
WE ALREADY SEE THE BEGINNINGS
OF THIS WITH DYNAMIC SPACECRAFT
DOCKING AND ENSEMBLE CONTROL.
The “TESSERAE” name and multitile structure
hearken to the small, colored tiles used in Roman
mosaics, where many standard pieces, or “tesserae,”
interlock to form a larger creation. We make this refer-
ence to ancient history when designing an artifact of
our space exploration future to tie architectural ele-
ments together across scales and across millennia. We
aim for TESSERAE to function as multiuse, low-cost
orbiting modules that supply a critical space infrastruc-
ture for the next generation of zero gravity habitats,
science labs, staging areas for on-surface exploration,
and more. TESSERAE should be thought of as ﬂexible
and reconﬁgurable modules to aid in both small-scale,
agile mission operations and grand-scale, iteratively
expanding space architecture. Our mission concept
focuses on supporting LEO, Lunar and Mars opera-
tions, with dual-use orbit and surface capability:
› Tiles are packed ﬂat and condensed for launch;
› Tiles are released after orbit insertion to quasi-
stochastically self-assemble into the target
geometry, while ﬂoating in microgravity;
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 35
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
› Once assembled, the structure can be recon ﬁg-
ured on demand (e.g., where a berthing port tile
was needed yesterday, a cupola tile can be
replaced tomorrow);
› Tiles can be disassembled entirely, packed ﬂat
again in an EDL (Entry, Descent and Landing)
vehicle, and then deployed and “snap-assem-
bled” with astronaut assists on the lunar or Mar-
tian surface.
Multiple, interlocking TESSERAE can serve as a
larger-volume orbiting base (e.g., “MOSAIC”: Mars
Orbiting Self-Assembling Interlocking Chambers), in
addition to supporting the coming waves of space tou-
rists and space hotels in low Earth orbit.
SENSOR NETWORKS—
EXPLORATION SENSING IN
EXTERIOR EXTREME
ENVIRONMENTS
Our group has been designing, building, deploying, and
using a variety of terrestrial sensor networks for 25
years, and we have explored a host of wearable, smart/
responsive buildings, and environmental sensing appli-
cations with them. 38 The large, outdoor, multimodal,
low-power wireless sensor network (WSN) that we
designed for deployment at Tidmarsh Farms, 39 a for-
mer cranberry bog that has been transformed into a
wetland wildlife sanctuary, inspired us to evolve differ-
ent kind of node suitable for lunar deployment. 40 Tak-
ing a modular, conﬁgurable approach, such as we used
for wearables in the early 2000s, 41 this node has the
form factor of a CubeSat (although is only 1/8 the size:
5 /C2 5 /C2 5c m—Figure 5 left) and is designed to be ballis-
tically “shot” out of a launcher on a rover or lander to
access lunar terrain that the main platform (such as a
single high-cost rover or lander) cannot reach (e.g.,
rockpiles, craters, etc.)—Figure 5 right. After the nodes
are deployed to the lunar surface, they establish a WSN
(which we term LunarWSN) with hardware redundancy
that can reduce the chance of failure.
Each node is equipped with wireless communica-
tion and wireless ranging capability. On each side of
the cubic sensor node, there is a wireless communica-
tion antenna, a wireless ranging antenna, and solar
cells to guarantee powering, functionality, and wire-
less connection with a communication relay or other
sensor nodes, regardless of landing orientation. After
the nodes are deployed from a rover or lander, they
can be localized and set up as an expandable WSN.
With a modular design, each sensor node can carry dif-
ferent sensor payloads for collecting desired scienti ﬁc
data simultaneously from multiple locations. Although
other sensing systems were explored, 40 the exemplary
functional LunarWSN node of Figure 5 is equipped
with electrode probes and an impedance convertor to
study the character of the Lunar regolith, where we
suspect the existence of water ice.
WSN technology can play an important role in
future in situ planetary exploration,42 providing meter-
scale spatial sampling that aids in better understand-
ing of dynamic phenomena.
CONNECTION TO VIRTUAL
ENVIRONMENTS
Although virtual and augmented reality have had
some exploratory use in space mission formulation,
for example, with the design and veri ﬁcation of the
Perseverance Rover and other projects at JPL and
other NASA centers, 43 the frontiers of mixed reality
hold enormous potential for near-future hybrid mis-
sion operations.
Since 2004, our group has explored various ways
spatially tagged sensor information is rendered in
FIGURE 5. Lunar wireless sensor node, working prototype (left) and conceptual ballistic deployment from a rover (right).
36 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
virtual worlds, making “Digital Twins ” that allow users
to explore a real environment by navigating engaging
“Cross-Reality” analogies.44 These culminated in our
DoppelLab45 and DoppelMarsh 39 experiences that
enable real-time browsing of multimodal sensor data
via animations, sensor-driven music, and streaming
audio in virtually rendered analogs of our Media Lab
building and the Tidmarsh Sanctuary [e.g., Figure 6(a)],
respectively. The terrain in Doppelmarsh is generated
by LiDAR measurements collected in 2012 by the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) at the real site and
imported into a custom software developed with the
Unity game engine. Real time and cached sensor data
from the ﬁeld are stored in a PostgresQL database and
streamed within the virtual landscape through Chain-
API,46 our custom hypermedia web service based on
the REST architecture that serves JSONþHAL and Web-
Sockets on demand. DoppelMarsh supported over a
dozen projects (see http://tidmarsh.media.mit.edu), and
as it ran openly online for many years, it was experi-
e n c e db ym a n yu s e r s—we know of several who would
just leave it running to enjoy the aesthetic connection
to the sanctuary. This suggests another way to connect
the general public to space and places where most will
never go, namely by aesthetically/artistically interpret-
ing space-related data streams into ambient or immer-
sive experiences that people can enjoy.
In collaboration with the Human Systems Lab
(HSL) in MIT ’s Aero/Astro dept and NASA Ames
researchers, we are exploring moving these concepts
into space mission ops, where various assets (rovers,
sensors, orbital platforms, and even AIs) and person-
nel distributed across vast distances, diverse time
delays, and different degrees of immersion need to
blend together. 47 Our current efforts in virtual space
presence focus on two applications of human –robot-
ics interaction. The ﬁrst simulates a virtual space ana-
log containing a digital-twin 3D model of a four
wheeled rover (provided by Rover Robotics), deployed
in a 60 /C2 32 sq. ft room that is mirrored by an artistic
rendering of a lunar environment built with the Unity
game engine [Figure 6(b)]. The user interface and inter-
action follow a real-time strategy (RTS) game-like view,
giving the user the ability to control a virtual model of
FIGURE 6. (a) Virtual “Rover” control panel run in Doppelmarsh, showing real-time sensor data. (b) VR mission planning for lunar
rover. (c) AR overlay of laser ranging data from Spot walking robot.
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 37
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the rover from within the lunar environment by setting
waypoints. The virtual rover will follow the path set by
the waypoints, while keeping track of previous traver-
ses through a color scheme reference. In the second
experiment, a SPOT quadrapod, provided by Boston
Dynamics, was deployed in an outdoor rocky seashore
environment [see Figure 6(c)]. The robot was aug-
mented with a Velodyne LiDAR and a custom multi-
purpose 3D-printed payload, which served as a
container for swapping various data-collection cam-
eras and devices (currently a 360 /C14 video camera, and
higher resolution LiDAR scanners). As seen in Figure 6,
the sensor data can appear as a video overlay and in
the UNITY visualization environment.
MULTISENSORY INTERIOR
EXPERIENCES
In this era of Internet of Things, smart buildings will
increasingly become partners, where they can change
properties to dynamically suit their users by leveraging
context and information coming from wearable and in
situ sensors. We have realized several projects in this
area, including our Mediated Atmospheres systems,
that explore how indoor terrestrial environments can
respond to occupant’s physiology and affect their cog-
nition by sensing multimodal signals (including activity
level, heart rate, breathing rate, posture, electrodermal
activity, skin temperature, and facial gestures) and
controlling lighting, projected images/video, ambient
sound, and even air ﬂow and smell to keep them in a
high focus-restoration state. 48,49 This concept has
attracted interest for long-duration space ﬂight, where
a variety of stressors could cause crew members to
experience complex psychological challenges that will
likely become more severe as the mission progresses
and exposes astronauts to situations of extreme sen-
sory deprivation and loneliness. 50 Moreover, deep
space settings might increase the general reduction
of stimuli and monotony inside the space habitat,
since it is an entirely arti ﬁcial closed-loop environ-
ment.51 To compensate, perhaps the spacecraft can
FIGURE 7. Mediated Atmospheres in Space: Top Right, the VR Astropod, a conceptual design for a compact, private immersive
facility in space (in collaboration with SEI member Tamalee Basu). Top Left, different views of the Tidmarsh Living Observatory
Portal prototype with live video projections (middle images). Bottom, artistic impression of the fully developed Portal in operation.
38 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
transform its presentation in accordance with the
state of the astronaut. We have focused explicitly
here on compact pods and customization of individual
habitat modules, where an astronaut can essentially
ﬂoat inside a reactive audio/video display or personal-
ized enclosure module.
Mediated Atmospheres in Space conceives a new
experience for space mission workspaces that can
self-regulate on the basis of an occupant ’s activities
and perceived affect in a closed-loop fashion. This
type of workspace can instantly adapt to users ’
requests and/or their affective state, and trade, for
example, the engaging focus of a library with the liber-
ating sensation of a stroll through the forest. The
responsive controller relies on ubiquitous, nonintru-
sive sensing of the occupant ’s activity, work habits,
and physiological or behavioral reaction to environ-
mental changes. Building on data from realistic work
scenarios, it has been possible to create personalized
occupant response models for appropriate multimedia
response. Dynamic control presents an opportunity to
synchronize the workspace experience with the ever-
changing requirements of today ’s workers and future
space explorers.
We have prototyped such an experience
(Figure 7)i nt h e Tidmarsh Living Observatory Por-
tal,52 which is a compact, individual multisensory
experience that generates an immersive physical
real-time telepresence into the enchanting natural
Tidmarsh wetland by recreating visuals, smells, and
sounds representative of the site, and streaming live
data as well as past recorded data, thereby also
allowing travel across time. For maximizing immer-
sion, the overall experien ce is tailored for a single
user and lasts for a minimum of three minutes, up
to half an hour. Leveraging projected graphics or
embedded large displays, it avoids the constraints
and disorientation that VR goggles can produce. The
architectural design of the pavilion is based on a
human-centered design approach inspired by the
idea of recreating an indivi dual Tidmarsh ecosystem
wherever the Portal is going to be located. Inside
such a cocoon, astronauts will feel protected and
transported into restoring terrestrial environments
such as this natural wetland, where they will be able
to adopt their own stress –relief activities, like medi-
tation, reading, or relaxing, while being immersed in
the beauty of nature.
CONCLUSION
In the bright dawn of this new space age, unprece-
dented opportunities abound to deploy and test
ideas in space. However, to appropriate Heinlein,
“Space is a Harsh Mistress, ” a demanding environ-
ment that has always required and encouraged
wide-ranging technical advance and adaptation. Yet,
as people go into space, they will be transformed by
the technology they bring along. The revolutions
that the UbiComp/Pervasive/IoT axis bring about on
Earth will usher a change in the human (e.g., affect-
ing perception, cognition, even identity as we are
increasingly connected and augmented by AI). This
will be de ﬁning for future spacefarers who will rely
on, or even more crucially , be transformed by this
technological backbone. it is not yesterday ’sa s t r o -
naut that will go out there ... And as a research
group grounded in Pervasive Computing, we have
been delighted to crack open a few views into this
quickly moving future and expose new pathways
toward Pervasive space implementation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank: the MIT Space Explora-
tion Initiative for supporting research development and
ﬂight opportunities for these projects; the NASA Transla-
tional Institute for Space Health (TRISH) for funding sup-
port; the NASA “Tech Flights ” (REDDI) program for
funding support and four parabolic ﬂights that provided
t h eb r i d g et ot a k eRovablesfrom terrestrial, to micrograv-
ity, to lunar applications; the NASA-funded RESOURCE
project supporting our analog mission research and asso-
ciated collaborators at NASA Ames. They also thank the
support of the MIT Media Lab Consortia and collaborators
across the Responsive Environments Group, including Ali
Shtarbanov, alums Artem Dementyev and Ara Knaian,
plus others at the Media Lab and MIT AeroAstro Human
Systems Lab (particularly Ferrous Ward and Cody Paige).
REFERENCES
1. C. Fishman, “How NASA gave birth to modern
computing—And gets no credit for it, ” FastCompany,
Jun. 03, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.
fastcompany.com/90362753/how-nasa-gave-birth-to-
modern-computing-and-gets-no-credit-for-it
2. A. Ekblaw Into the Anthropocosmos: A Whole Space
Catalog from the MIT Space Exploration Initiative .
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2021.
3. P. Pataranutaporn et al., “SpaceCHI: Designing human-
computer interaction systemsf o rs p a c ee x p l o r a t i o n ,” in
Proc. CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst.,2 0 2 1 ,p p .1–6.
4. N. De Monchaux, Spacesuit: Fashioning Apollo.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2011.
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 39
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5. Bar ﬁeld, W. and Caudell, T., Eds., Fundamentals of
Wearable Computers and Augmented Reality . NJ, NJ,
USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001.
6. J. A. Paradiso, J. Lifton, and M. Broxton, “Sensate
media—Multimodal electronic skins as dense sensor
networks,” BT Technol. J., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 32 –44, 2004.
7. I. Wicaksono, J. Cherston, and J. A. Paradiso,
“Electronic textile gaia: Ubiquitous computational
substrates across geometric scales,” IEEE Pervasive
Comput., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 18 –29, Jul.–Sep. 2021.
8. J. Cherston and J. A. Paradiso, “The smartly dressed
spacecraft: Wrapped in sensor-rich electronic textiles,
space structures could double as scientiﬁc instruments,”
IEEE Spectr.,v o l .5 8 ,n o .1 2 ,p p .3 0–37, Dec. 2021.
9. J. Cherston et al., “Large-area electronic skins in
space: Vision and pre ﬂight characterization for ﬁrst
aerospace piezoelectric e-textile,” in Proc. Sensors
Smart Structures Technol. Civil, Mech., Aerosp. Syst. ,
2020, Art. no. 11379.
10. S. Payra, I. Wicaksono, J. Cherston, C. Honnet, V.
Sumini, and J. A. Paradiso, “Feeling through
spacesuits: Application of space-resilient E-Textiles
to enable haptic feedback on pressurized
extravehicular suits, ” in P r o c .I E E EA e r o s p .C o n f .,
2021, pp. 1 –12.
11. K. Tanaka, N. Nishimura, and Y. Kawai, “Adaptation to
microgravity, deconditioning, and countermeasures,”
J. Physiol. Sci., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 271 –281, 2017.
12. J. M. Waldie and D. J. Newman, “A gravity loading
countermeasure skinsuit,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 68,
no. 7/8, pp. 722 –730, 2011.
13. I. Wicaksono, A. Shtarbanov, R. Slater, E. Ranade, and
J. Paradiso, “Peristaltic (PS) suit: Active bioelectronic
sensing-compression spacesuit for microgravity
adaptation and cardiovascular deconditioning,” in
Proc. ASCEND, 2022, p. 4208.
14. I. Wicaksono et al., “A tailored, electronic textile
conformable suit for large-scale spatiotemporal
physiological sensing in vivo, ” NPJ Flexible Electron.,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1 –13, 2020.
15. I. Wicaksono et al., “3DKnITS: Three-dimensional
digital knitting of intelligent textile sensor for activity
recognition and biomechanical monitoring,” in Proc.
IEEE Med. Biol. Soc. Conf. , 2022, pp. 2448 –2454.
16. A. Shtarbanov, “FlowIO development Platform–the
pneumatic ‘Raspberry pi’ for soft robotics,” in Proc.
Extended Abstr. CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. ,
2021, pp. 1–6.
17. J. A. Paradiso, K. Hsiao, A. Benbasat, and Z. Teegarden,
“Design and implementation of expressive footwear, ”
IBM Syst. J., vol. 39, no. 3-4, pp. 511 –529, Oct. 2000.
18. N. S. Shenck and J. A. Paradiso, “Energy scavenging
with shoe-mounted piezoelectrics,” IEEE Micro, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 30 –42, May–Jun. 2001.
19. A. W. Hanger and A. A. Rosener, “Final analysis/design
and prototype construction of a selected mobility and
restraint device,” Martin Marietta NASA, Tech.
Rep. MCR-69-513, Nov. 1969.
20. J. Markowitz and H. Herr, “Human leg model predicts
muscle forces, states, and energetics during walking, ”
PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 5, no. 12, May 2016,
Art. no. e1004912.
21. S. Leigh, K. Parekh, T. Denton, W. S. Peebles, M. H.
Johnson, and P. Maes, “Morphology extension kit: A
modular robotic platform for customizable and
physically capable wearables,” in Proc. ACM TEI, 2018,
pp. 11–18.
22. V. Sumini, M. Muccillo, J. Milliken, A. Ekblaw, and J.
Paradiso, “SpaceHuman: A soft robotic prosthetic for
space exploration,” in Proc. CHI Late-Breaking Work,
2020, pp. 1–8.
23. S. Das, “Selﬁes take ﬂight with nixie wearable drone, ”
CNET, Nov. 09, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.
cnet.com/tech/mobile/selﬁes-take-ﬂight-with-nixie-
wearable-drone/
24. A. Dementyev et al., “Rovables: Miniature on-body
robots as mobile wearables, ” in Proc. 29th
Annu. Symp. User Interface Softw. Technol. ,2 0 1 6 ,
pp. 111 –120.
25. J. Cherston and J. A. Paradiso, “Space webs as
infrastructure for crawling sensors on low gravity
bodies,” in Proc. 31st Annu. AIAA/USU Conf. Small
Satellites, 2017, Art. no. SSC17-P2-03.
26. A. Flores-Abad, O. Ma, K. Pham, and S. Ulrich, “A review
of space robotics technologies for on-orbit servicing, ”
Prog. Aerosp. Sci., vol. 68, pp. 1 –26, 2014.
27. M. A. Shoemaker, M. Vavrina, D. E. Gaylor, R. Mcintosh,
M. Volle, and J. Jacobsohn, “OSAM-1 decommissioning
orbit design,” in Proc. AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics
Specialist Conf., 2020, Art. no. 345.
28. N. T. Redd, “Bringing satellites back from the dead:
Mission extension vehicles give defunct spacecraft a
new lease on life-[News], ” IEEE Spectr., vol. 57, no. 8,
pp. 6–7, Aug. 2020.
29. A. Flores-Abad, O. Ma, K. Pham, and S. Ulrich, “A review
of space robotics technologies for on-orbit servicing, ”
Prog. Aerosp. Sci., vol. 68, pp. 1 –26, 2014.
30. K. Nakagaki, A. Dementyev, S. Follmer, J. A. Paradiso,
and H. Ishii, “ChainFORM: A linear integrated modular
hardware system for shape changing interfaces, ” in
Proc. 29th Annu. Symp. User Interface Softw. Technol. ,
2016, pp. 87–96.
40 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
31. M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo, and R. Nagpal,
“Programmable self- assembly in a thousand-robot
swarm,” Science, vol. 345, no. 6198, pp. 795 –799,
2014.
32. P. R. Wurman, R. D. D ’Andrea, and M. Mountz,
“Coordinating hundreds of cooperative, autonomous
vehicles in warehouses,” AI Mag., vol. 29, no. 1, 2008,
Art. no. 251.
33. A. S. Otero, A. Chen, D. W. Miller, and M. Hilstad,
“SPHERES: Development of an ISS laboratory for
formation ﬂight and docking research,” in Proc. IEEE
Aerosp. Conf., 2002, p. 1.
34. N. Howard and H. D. Nguyen, “Magnetic capture
docking mechanism,” U.S. Patent 7,815,149, 2010.
35. A. C. Ekblaw, “Self-aware self-assembly for space
architecture: Growth paradigms for in-space
manufacturing,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts
Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020.
36. A. Ekblaw, A. Prosina, D. Newman, and J. Paradiso,
“Space habitat reconﬁgurability: TESSERAE platform
for self-aware assembly,” in Proc. 30th IAA Symp.
Space Soc., 2019, Art. no. 0481.
37. R. Zisk, “Ariel Ekblaw explains the future of
space stations, ” FastCompany, Jul. 08, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.fastcompany.com/
90767147/ariel-ekblaw-explains-the-future-of-space-
stations
38. J. Paradiso, “Our extended sensoria—How humans will
connect with the Internet of Things, ” in Proc. Next
Step, Exponential Life, Open Mind Collection , 2016,
pp. 48–75.
39. B. Mayton et al., “The networked sensory landscape:
Capturing and experiencing ecological change across
scales,” Presence, Teleoperators Virtual Environ.,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 182 –209, May 2017.
40. F. Liu, A. Ekblaw, and J. A. Paradiso, “LunarWSN
node—A Wireless sensor network node designed for
in-situ lunar water ice detection, ” in Proc. Small Satell.
Conf., 2022, Art. no. 481.
41. A. Y. Benbasat and J. A. Paradiso, “A compact
modular wireless sensor system, ” in Proc. 4th Int.
IEEE/ACM Conf. Inf. Process. Sensor Netw. , 2005,
pp. 415 –415.
42. P. Rodrigues et al., “Space wireless sensor networks
for planetary exploration: Node and network
architectures,” in Proc. NASA/ESA Conf. Adaptive
Hardware Syst., 2014, pp. 180 –187.
43. C. Donalek et al., “Immersive and collaborative data
visualization using virtual reality platforms, ” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data , 2014, pp. 609 –614.
44. J. Lifton, M. Laibowitz, D. Harry, N. W. Gong, M. Mittal,
and J. A. Paradiso, “Metaphor and manifestation—
Cross reality with ubiquitous sensor/actuator
networks,” IEEE Pervasive Comput. Mag., vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 24–33, Jul.–Sep. 2009.
45. G. Dublon et al., “DoppelLab: Tools for exploring and
harnessing multimodal sensor network data, ” in Proc.
IEEE Sensors, 2011, pp. 1612 –1615.
4 6 . S .R u s s e l la n dJ .A .P a r a d i s o ,“Hypermedia APIs for
sensor data: A pragmatic approach to the web
of things, ” in Proc. ACM Mobiquitous , 2014,
pp. 30 –39.
47. C. A. Paige, D. Newman, D. D. Haddad, F. Ward, and T.
Piercy, “Lunar instrument data integration into the
virtual reality mission simulation system for decision
making and situational awareness,” in Proc. 50th Int.
Conf. Environ. Syst., 2021, pp. 12 –15.
48. N. Zhao, A. Azaria, and J. A. Paradiso, “Mediated
atmospheres: A multimodal mediated work
environment, ” in Proc. ACM Interactive, Mobile,
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. , 2017, pp. 31:1 –31:23.
49. N. Zhao, E. C. Kodama, and J. A. Paradiso, “Mediated
atmosphere table (MAT): Adaptive multimodal media
system for stress restoration,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 23, pp. 23614 –23625, Dec. 2022.
50. T. M. Fraser, “The intangibles of habitability during long
duration space missions.” Accessed: May 18, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/
casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19680017230.pdf
51. S. H €auplik-Meusburger and S. Bishop, “Chapter 7,
space habitats and habitability: Designing for isolated
and conﬁned environments on earth and in space, ” in
Space and Society Series, D. A. Vakoch, Ed., Europe,
Switzerland: Springer, 2021.
52. V. Sumini et al., “Tidmarsh living observatory portal: A
multi-sensory experience option reconnecting
astronauts with nature during space exploration, ” in
Proc. SpaceCHI 2.0 Workshop, 2022, Art. no. 480.
ARIEL EKBLAW is the director of the MIT Space Exploration
Initiative and the founding CEO of Aurelia Institute, a hybrid
space architecture research institute and venture incubation
studio. Her research work and the labs she leads build toward
future habitats and space stations in orbit around the Earth,
Moon, and Mars. Ekblaw received her B.S. degree in physics,
mathematics, and philosophy from Yale University and her
Ph.D. at the MIT Media Lab, working with the Responsive
Environments Group. Contact her at aekblaw@mit.edu.
April-June 2023 IEEE Pervasive Computing 41
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
JULIANA CHERSTON received her Ph.D. degree from the
Responsive Environments Group, MIT Media Lab, Cambridge,
MA, 02139, USA. Her research has encompassed multifunc-
tional space structures, sensate textiles for space applica-
tions, and novel space-based scienti ﬁc detector systems.
Contact her at cherston@mit.edu.
FANGZHENG LIU is with MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA,
02139, USA. Liu received his second master ’s degree in digital
communication and multimedia from MIT Media Lab, where
his thesis focused on building a Lunar Wireless Sensor Net-
work by using wireless sensor nodes that can be ballistically
deployed from a rover, lander, or even dropped by a low- ﬂy
satellite. Contact him at fzliu@mit.edu.
IRMANDY WICAKSONO is currently working toward his Ph.D.
degree in media arts and sciences as a research assistant at the
Responsive Environments Group, MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA,
02139, USA. He is currently seamlessly embedding functional devi-
ces into soft materials and the fabric of everyday life to develop
electronic textiles in various forms, for deployment in areas like
wearables, building interiors, andspacesuits, and for applications
ranging from health and well-being, biomechanics, space explora-
tion, human–computer interaction, to the interactive arts. Contact
him at irmandy@mit.edu.
DON DEREK HADDAD is currently working toward his Ph.D.
degree in the MIT Media Lab ’s Responsive Environments
Group, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA. His research focuses on
the intersection of the real, the imaginary, and the virtual
through an interdisciplinary approach, incorporating ﬁelds
such as mixed and virtual reality, human robotics interaction
(HRI), and space exploration. He is currently developing and
exploring ideas related to scalable presence (ranging from
immersion to peripheral awareness) and dynamic representa-
tion of humans, arti ﬁcial intelligence, robots, and sensor net-
works in hybrid real/virtual environments, in collaboration
with organizations such as Boston Dynamics, MIT AeroAstro,
and NASA. Contact him at ddh@mit.edu.
VALENTINA SUMINI is a visiting professor with Politecnico di
Milano, 20133, Milan, Italy, where she developed and lectures
in the course “Architecture for Human Space Exploration. ”
Her space architecture research focuses on inventing new
computational design methods for multiperformance habi-
tats, soft-robotic prosthetics to enhance mobility and dexter-
ity in microgravity, and construction techniques using in situ
resources. Contact her at vsumini@mit.edu.
JOSEPH A. PARADISO is the Alexander W. Dreyfoos (1954)
professor in media arts and sciences at the MIT Media Lab,
Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA, where he directs the Responsive
Environments Group and serves as the associate academic
head. Before joining Media Lab, he developed spacecraft con-
trol and sensor systems at Draper Laboratory and high-energy
physics detectors at CERN Geneva and ETH Zurich. His cur-
rent research explores how sensor networks augment and
mediate human experience, interaction and perception. Para-
diso received his Ph.D. degree in physics from MIT. He is a
senior member of the IEEE and AIAA, and a member of the
APS and Sigma Xi. He is the corresponding author of this arti-
cle. Contact him at paradiso@media.mit.edu.
42 IEEE Pervasive Computing April-June 2023
PERVASIVE COMPUTING IN SPACE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:44:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 