JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1
Experimenting with Soft Robotics in Education:
A Systematic Literature Review from 2006 to 2022
Israel Ulises Cayetano-Jim ´enez, Erick Axel Martinez-R ´ıos, Rogelio Bustamante-Bello, Ricardo
Ram´ırez-Mendoza, and Mar´ıa Soledad Ram´ırez-Montoya.
Abstract—Educational robotics (ER) is a discipline of applied
robotics focused on teaching robot design, analysis, application,
and operation. Traditionally, ER has favored rigid robots, over-
looking the potential of soft robots (SRs). While rigid robots
offer insights into dynamics, kinematics, and control, they have
limitations in exploring the depths of mechanical design and
material properties. In this regard, SRs present an opportunity
to expand educational topics and activities in robotics through
their unique bioinspired properties and accessibility. Despite
their promise, there is a notable lack of research on SRs as
educational tools, limiting the identification of research avenues
that could promote their adoption in educational settings. This
study conducts a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) to elucidate
the impact of SRs across academic levels, pedagogical strategies,
prevalent artificial muscles, educational activities, and assessment
methods. The findings indicate a significant focus on K-12
workshops utilizing soft pneumatic actuators. Furthermore, SRs
have fostered the development of fabrication and mechanical
design skills beyond mere programming tasks. However, there
is a shortage of studies analyzing their use in higher education
or their impact on learning outcomes, suggesting a critical need
for comprehensive evaluations to determine their effectiveness,
rather than solely relying on surveys for student feedback. Thus,
there is an opportunity to explore and evaluate the use of
SRs in more advanced settings and multidisciplinary activities,
urging for rigorous assessments of their influence on learning
outcomes. By undertaking this, we aim to provide a foundation
for integrating SRs into the educational robotics curriculum,
potentially transforming teaching methodologies and enriching
students’ learning experiences.
Index Terms —bioinspiration, educational innovation, educa-
tional robotics, hands-on workshops, soft robotics.
I. I NTRODUCTION
S
OFT ROBOTICS, a domain distinguished by the use of
flexible materials and biomimetic design principles, has
seen a remarkable expansion in research and development
(R&D) over the previous decade [1]. This field diverges
Manuscript received 9 August 2023; revised February 14, 2024.
Israel Ulises Cayetano-Jim ´enez was with the School of Engineering and
Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico City 14380, Mexico e-mail:
israel.cayetano@tec.mx.
Erick Axel Martinez-R ´ıos was with the School of Engineering and
Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico City 14380, Mexico e-mail:
a01331212@tec.mx
Rogelio Bustamante-Bello was with the School of Engineering and Sci-
ences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico City 14380, Mexico e-mail: rbus-
tama@tec.mx
Ricardo Ram ´ırez-Mendoza was with the School of Engineering and
Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico City 14380, Mexico e-mail:
ricardo.ramirez@tec.mx
Mar´ıa Soledad Ram´ırez-Montoya was with the Institute for the Future of
Education, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Nuevo Leon 64849, Mexico e-mail:
solramirez@tec.mx
drastically from traditional robotics, which primarily lever-
ages rigid components and fixed geometries, depending on
actuation methods such as electric motors or pressurized fluid
cylinders [2]. The bioinspired philosophy in soft robotics can
be exemplified by Soft Artificial Muscles (SAMs), which are
built from flexible materials, replicating the compliance and
forms of their biological counterparts, and can produce a wide
range of movements [3], [4].
Soft robotics employ diverse actuation strategies, including
tendon-driven, fluidic actuation, and stimuli-responsive smart
materials [5]. Pneumatic Artificial Muscles (PAMs), like McK-
ibben muscles or PneuNets, are the most commonly used due
to their low cost, ready availability of components, and simple
manufacturing processes [6]. Other technologies, such as Elec-
troactive Polymers (EAPs), Dielectric Elastomers Actuators
(DEAs), Ionic Polymer-Metal Composites (IPMCs), and Shape
Memory Alloys (SMAs), though cost-effective, might require
specific operating conditions, including high voltages, aqueous
environments, or elevated temperatures, restricting their usage
in some fields [7].
Innovations in this field are expanding into areas tradi-
tionally dominated by conventional robotics, such as the
creation of grippers inspired by biology that provide a gentle
yet firm grasp on delicate objects [6]. Additionally, soft
robotics has facilitated navigation through obstacle-ridden,
unstructured terrains [8]. Moreover, the potential for human-
robot collaboration is increased by the inherent safety of soft
robots, creating service and assistive robotics opportunities.
This emerging field has the potential to revolutionize various
industries, notably in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) education. [9].
Educational robotics aims to improve learning outcomes
through the integration of robot-centered activities, technolo-
gies, and artifacts, using a student-centered constructivist
pedagogical approach [10], [11]. This experiential approach
aligns with the nature of robotics and helps learners construct
knowledge. Students are prompted to conceptualize, design,
build, program, and test robots to execute specific tasks,
thereby honing digital skills [12]. This process not only equips
them with technical abilities such as mechanical design and
computer programming but also promotes critical thinking and
problem-solving skills [13], [14]. Students gain a profound
understanding of robotics principles by observing the direct
effects of their actions and revising their strategies based on
outcomes, fostering a sense of ownership and independence
in their learning journey [15], [16].
Platforms such as LEGO Mindstorms® serve this purpose
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2
Fig. 1. General overview and comparison of rigid and soft robotics within
educational robotics.
well [17], yet they primarily belong to conventional rigid
robotics and focus on predefined activities. In this regard,
several studies have presented the development, implementa-
tion, and assessment of robotic platforms based on rigid robots
for educational purposes [18]–[23]. While these systems allow
in-depth exploration of rigid body kinematics, dynamics, and
implementation aspects, they fail to showcase the advantages
of compliant structures and novel actuation mechanisms. Ac-
cording to Yu et al. [24], when working with robot kits, the
students spend most of their time programming rather than
designing robot bodies. Thus, the student mainly focuses on
solving control tasks without considering the robot’s mechani-
cal design and material properties. Moreover, rigid robots have
certain disadvantages that mitigate their use, such as the lack
of safety in close contact with humans, their higher cost, and
their more significant weight than soft robots [25]. Hence, soft
robotics offers a unique chance to stimulate scientific and engi-
neering thinking, fostering understanding of related disciplines
like materials science and biology [26], [27]. Furthermore, soft
robotics can provide an interdisciplinary learning experience
that rigid robotics cannot replicate, especially in terms of
biological mimicry and interaction safety. By incorporating
soft robotics into education, it could be possible to spark a
lifelong interest in STEM fields and robotics. An overview
and comparison of rigid and soft robotics within educational
robotics are presented in Fig. 1.
Though comprehensive reviews have been conducted in
educational robotics, their focus does not encompass the
implementation of soft robotics. They mainly concentrate on
the application of existing robotic kits or the development of
robotic platforms for potential use in education [28]–[30], the
use of social robots to assess Human-robot Interaction (HRI)
[31], and the potential and challenges of educational robotics
in engaging students and teachers [32]–[35], with some even
emphasizing mathematics [36]. However, a literature review
on soft robotics use in educational robotics has yet to be
conducted. Thus, there is an opportunity to examine the uses
of soft robots in education by reviewing the recent literature.
The potential of soft robotics in education highlights the
importance of assessing its impact across all levels of edu-
cation. As educational robotics has already demonstrated its
benefits, it would be worthwhile to investigate the platforms
and methods that introduce students to the foundational scien-
tific and technological concepts that underlie soft robotics. To
achieve this, a thorough and systematic literature review (SLR)
could be conducted to comprehensively evaluate the existing
research, allowing for a methodical examination of its current
state.
This paper presents an SLR that aims to explore the field of
bioinspiration in educational robotics. The review focuses on
the countries and years in which soft robotics has been utilized
for education, the types of bioinspired muscles employed, the
educational activities to which soft robotics has been applied,
and how these activities have been evaluated. The review
addresses the need for more research on using soft robots in
education and emphasizes the significance of research in this
area. The findings of this review are expected to serve as a
roadmap for future research, highlighting the primary research
themes, methodologies, and platforms currently used.
To achieve this, the review begins with a background section
on the two main topics discussed in this study: educational
robotics and soft robotics. Consequently. Section III describes
the methodology used to perform the SLR, highlighting the
critical aspects addressed. Following this, we present our
results, outlining key findings enriched with illustrative graph-
ics for improved comprehension. We analyze these crucial
insights in the discussion section, where we also provide
recommendations for researchers, educators, and policymakers
eager to advance this field further, suggesting successful steps
and materials for implementation. Finally, we summarize our
core findings and potential future research directions.
II. B ACKGROUND
This section presents an overview of the main topics dis-
cussed in the present study: educational robotics and soft
robotics. It is important to highlight that the term soft robotic
education has not been defined in the current state of the
art. Nevertheless, since this study is focused on the areas of
educational robotics and soft robotics, a general background
on these two concepts is presented below.
A. Educational Robotics
Educational robotics aims to utilize robots as a teaching
tool that helps students tackle problems in areas unrelated
to robotics. The above seeks to let the students construct
their understanding of concepts and representations in both
science and technology [11]. Hence, robotics in education
follows the constructivism theory of learning. According to
constructivism’s underlying principles, knowledge is viewed
as an active experience created through interactions with the
environment [37]. In constructivism, students’ prior knowledge
and experience are the foundation for generating additional
knowledge.
A second theory related to educational robotics is con-
structionism. The theory of constructionism shares ideas with
the view of constructivism but expands it by not only sup-
porting student-centered learning but also giving importance
to discovering learning through tangible objects to connect
prior knowledge and new information [38], [39]. The key
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3
difference between constructionism and constructivism is that
while constructivism mainly focuses on the mental process of
learners or students, constructionism is interested in a physical
process, such as creating a physical model or generating a
mathematical equation [40]. The above makes the thinking
and learning process visible [41].
Robotics kits such as those of LEGO Mindstorms® pro-
vide a modular approach to programming and construction,
frequently utilized as creativity-enhancing tools in the class-
room. By working with these robotic kits, the student can
have the opportunity to apply engineering knowledge and
clever solutions to a wide range of problems that can involve
making a robot move from one position to another. Moreover,
educational robotics has been directed by principles such as
problem-based learning and gamification [42]. Furthermore,
robotics’s playful and physical embodiment of learning has
impacted students’ engagement, as presented by Apiola et al.
[43] and Nemiro et al. [44].
B. Soft Robotics
Soft robots represent a blend of biologically-inspired ac-
tuation, sensory, and cognitive functions, combined with a
design that promotes safe, intuitive, and sensitive interactions
[45]. While conventional robots are frequently constructed
using high-stiffness materials like steel, aluminum, titanium, or
stainless steel, soft robots are primarily made of hyperelastic
materials, such as polymers, rubber, or silicone. These flexible
materials mirror the elasticity and malleability of biological
systems, providing soft robots with an increased degree of
freedom in their movement compared to their rigid counter-
parts. This flexibility also allows soft robots to interact safely
with their environment and quickly adapt to unpredictable
circumstances [46]. The unique characteristics of soft robots
afford them several advantages over more conventional, rigid
robots. These include safer human-machine interaction, the
capacity to create wearable devices, and the ability to de-
velop simple yet effective gripping systems. These unique
capabilities have enabled the application of soft robotics
across a diverse range of fields [47]. Examples of successful
applications include the exploration of delicate deep-sea fauna,
performing minimally invasive procedures such as endoscopies
and surgeries, and the delivery of targeted drug therapies. Fur-
thermore, combining soft and rigid robots provides advanced
object manipulation skills that can benefit various industrial
environments [46]. Soft robots leverage several different ac-
tuation mechanisms [46], from which the most common ones
are the following:
• Fluidic: These robots use pressurized fluid in an inflatable
compartment designed to deform into a specific shape
when inflated. This category includes devices such as
Pneumatic Artificial Muscles, Pneu-nets, or McKibben
Muscles.
• Thermal: In these robots, the use of SMAs or Shape
Memory Polymers allows the robot to revert to its original
shape when the temperature exceeds a specific threshold
[48].
Fig. 2. Flowchart illustrating the search and screening process.
• Electrostatic and Electrochemical: Electrostatic soft
robots use a high-voltage current applied to elastic elec-
trodes (e.g., conductive ink) surrounding a stretchable
dielectric membrane. The electric attraction deforms the
dielectric material, creating a DEA [49]. If the dielec-
tric membrane is replaced with a shell containing a
dielectric fluid, such as oil, this creates a Hydraulically
Amplified Self-healing Elastomer [50].On the other hand,
electrochemical actuation, as found in IPMC actuators,
replaces the dielectric membrane with an ion-conductive
polyelectrolyte, which deforms and creates motion when
subjected to voltages of around 5 V in an aqueous
medium [46].
In light of this versatility and adaptability, this review aims
to explore academic literature that has employed soft robots in
educational settings. These soft robots are viewed as potential
replacements or alternatives to the traditional rigid robots
commonly used in educational robotics.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
This SLR follows the guidelines provided by the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA) method [51]. The procedure is divided into four
stages: 1) formulating research questions, 2) devising a search
strategy, 3) performing screening, and 4) data synthesis. Fig.
2 depicts the flowchart of the search and screening process.
A. Research Questions
The research questions (RQs) aim to guide our study toward
understanding the role and impact of soft robotics in education,
specifically within bioinspiration. These RQs allow us to
extract relevant data from the existing literature and create
a structured dataset for thorough analysis. We’ve formulated
these questions based on the need to explore the position,
impact, incorporation, and technical choices of soft robotics
in education. The resulting RQs and their potential answers
are detailed in Table I.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4
In our review, it is essential to determine the position
of soft robotics in education within the broader domain of
bioinspiration. This understanding is formulated with the first
research question, which allows for the classification and
quantification of the relevance of soft robotics in education
and related bioinspired fields. If a single record covers multiple
areas, including soft robotics, it will be categorized under soft
robotics. If different areas are addressed, the dominant one
will be considered.
Following this, we examine the impact and evolution of soft
robotics in education as represented in scientific literature. For
this purpose, we frame two RQs encompassing the keywords
and temporal and geographical contexts. RQ2 aims to provide
an overview of the related concepts associated with using soft
robotics in education. To achieve this, the keywords of each
of the review studies were surveyed. RQ3 explores where and
when soft robotics has been incorporated into education. The
above is done to show the trend in applying soft robotics in
education and in which countries its use has been tested.
To understand the educational levels targeted to employ
soft robots, RQ4 was formulated. We anticipate explicit dis-
tinctions such as K-12 or higher education. However, the
category general public (i.e., K-12, higher education, and
research students) is included to capture instances where the
technology targets a broader audience rather than a specific
educational level. On the other hand, RQ5 is established
to understand the main approaches of the studies that have
been published, determining whether they were focused on
testing the technology or developing soft robots to be used
for educational purposes. RQ6 examines the types of SAMs
commonly used and identified in the literature. The answers to
these questions help us to understand the underlying choices
and limitations considered across a range of SAMs.
RQ7 aims to elucidate the activities utilized in implementing
soft robotics in education. Examples of these activities include
programming the robots or undertaking mechanical design to
construct the robot. Another facet that has been scrutinized
is the method of validating the usage of soft robotics in an
educational setting, that is, how the impact and perception of
this technology have been confirmed. To address this, RQ8
was formulated. Lastly, RQ9 strives to highlight the existing
gaps in using soft robotics in education and identify potential
future research directions. These directions could be proposed
based on the advantages and disadvantages observed or could
emerge from existing research. This final question is crucial
for outlining a roadmap for the development and application
of soft robotics in education and determining the best ways to
leverage this technology to enrich learning experiences.
B. Search Strategy
A comprehensive search strategy was designed and executed
to identify pertinent records that could provide answers to
the research questions. This strategy was applied to two
major databases: SCOPUS and Web of Science (WoS). These
databases were preferred due to their broad coverage of peer-
reviewed publications across various academic fields, includ-
ing engineering and education, and our accessibility to them.
TABLE I
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Research question (RQ) Possible answer or classification
Bioinspiration
RQ1. What fields of bioinspiration are
covered within education?
Locomotion, bioinspired control, soft
robotics
Soft Robotics
RQ2. What are the main keywords? Index keywords
RQ3. When was the research published
and what is the geographical location
of the authors?
Publication year and first author’s re-
search center country.
RQ4. What educational level is being
impacted by the technology?
K-12 [9], [52], [53], higher educa-
tion (undergraduate or graduate stu-
dents) [54]–[56], or the general pub-
lic (i.e., K-12, undergraduate, graduate
students) [57], [58].
RQ5. What is the approach the tech-
nology has towards education?
Hands-on: the participants have a
hands-on workshop to fabricate a sys-
tem using the technology [52], [53],
[59].
R&D: the authors present the results of
R&D on new manufacturing processes
or technologies that can foster the ap-
plication of SAMs in education [57],
[58], [60].
Didactic tool: the authors present a
platform focused on education that
uses soft robotics [61].
RQ6. What type of soft artificial mus-
cle is being employed?
Classification based on [62], where the
possible answers can include DEA,
ionic polymer-metal composite, SMA,
and PAM.
RQ7. What kind of educational activ-
ities have been carried out with soft
robotics?
Design:the participants conceptualize
a novel or enhanced morphology to
accomplish a task [53], [59], [63].
Fabrication:the participants manufac-
ture an actuator or structure [52], [64].
Programming:the participants write
code to control their prototype [63],
[65].
RQ8. What has been the main method-
ology or validation procedure to eval-
uate the effect of soft robotics in edu-
cation?
Surveys: the participants perform a
survey related to their experience [56],
[64], [65].
Observation: the instructor records the
main insights and findings while the
participants engage in the activities
[63].
Prototype evaluation: the participants
demonstrate the performance of their
soft robotic prototype [54], [55].
RQ9. Given the identified advantages
and disadvantages, what open ques-
tions and future areas of research exist
related to soft robotics in education?
Continue evaluating the technology
or method, modify the technology or
method.
Moreover, SCOPUS and WoS were selected to reduce the bias
related to the quality and reporting mechanism of the reviewed
studies by collecting data from reputed databases similar to the
study of Anwar et al. [41].
To gain a holistic view of the research conducted in our area
of interest, the search included diverse types of documents:
articles, conference papers, and reviews. The above is done to
uncover any existing literature review or pioneering work.
The keywords for the search were carefully chosen to
capture a wide range of topics under the umbrella of education
and robotics, specifically within the bioinspired domain. These
keywords were applied to the titles, abstracts, and keywords
sections of potential documents. The first group of terms
sought out articles with a clear educational aspect, covering
any education, teaching, or learning. The term “robot*” en-
sured that the articles pertained to robotics. The third group of
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5
TABLE II
SEARCH QUERIES .
SCOPUS search query WoS search query
TITLE-ABS-KEY ((educat* OR
teach* OR learn*) AND robot* AND
(bio-insp* OR bioinsp* OR biomim*
OR “artificial muscle” OR “soft
robot*”) AND (k-12 OR school OR
*graduate OR ((university OR
science OR technology OR
engineering) AND (student OR
course OR classroom)))) AND
(LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “cp”) OR
LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “ar”) OR
LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE , “re”))
TS = ((educat* OR teach* OR
learn*) AND robot* AND
(bio-insp* OR bioinsp* OR
biomim* OR “artificial muscle”
OR “soft robot*”) AND (k-12 OR
school OR *graduate OR
((university OR science OR
technology OR engineering) AND
(student OR course OR
classroom)))) AND (DT ==
(“PROCEEDINGS PAPER” OR
“ARTICLE” OR “REVIEW”)
keywords was aimed at identifying articles specifically within
the bioinspired or soft robotics domain. Lastly, the search
criteria ensured that the articles covered educational practices
at various levels, from K-12 schools to university studies.
We specifically targeted articles that touched upon broader
fields of science, technology, or engineering and required the
appearance of the terms “course” or “student” to narrow down
the results and avoid irrelevant entries.
The final search queries applied to SCOPUS and WoS
databases, with their corresponding equivalent query syntax,
are detailed in Table II. In the search query for the SCOPUS
database, “TITLE-ABS-KEY” performs a search where the
terms appear in the title, keywords, or abstract, “LIMIT-TO”
limits the search to the given input, “DOCTYPE” stands for
document type, “cp” stands for Conference Paper, “ar” stands
for Article, and “re” stands for Review. The boolean operator
AND encounters just those documents that contain all the
terms, while the boolean operator OR encounters documents
with any of the terms. For the search query of the WoS
database, “TS” performs a search where the terms appear in
the title, keywords, or abstract, “DT” stands for the document
type. On the other hand, the boolean operator’s function is
similar to that of the SCOPUS database. The asterisk is used
on characteristic word stems for recovering term variations.
The search was carried out in November 2022 and covered all
records up to that date.
C. Screening
We identified 149 records from the databases, of which 54
were excluded due to duplication. In particular, 53 records
from WoS were already present in SCOPUS, and one record
appeared twice in SCOPUS. After this, a further screening
was conducted to exclude irrelevant publications or those not
meeting the analysis criteria. This process comprised two
steps: initial screening based on titles, abstracts, and keywords,
followed by a thorough full-text examination. During the first
screening phase, 26 documents were excluded. Although the
search terms were designed to yield only relevant results, these
publications did not clearly or explicitly focus on education,
even though they all related to bioinspiration or soft robotics.
After full-text analysis, no articles were excluded based on
scope, but seven were inaccessible. However, two non-English
articles were identified, one in Chinese and the other in
TABLE III
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA
Inclusion Exclusion
The document is written in English.
The document relates how bioinspira-
tion can be introduced or applied to
education in terms of a technology or
method.
The document is written in a language
different from English.
The document includes research on
bioinspired technologies, but its main
focus is different from its implementa-
tion in the educational process.
Japanese. Since language was a predefined exclusion criterion,
60 articles are included in this study, with 24 focusing on soft
robotics. The inclusion and exclusion criteria during both steps
are detailed in Table III. Records focusing on bioinspiration
were utilized to answer RQ1, whereas those focusing on soft
robotics were used to address RQ2 to RQ9.
D. Synthesis
After the data screening, we compiled and interpreted the re-
sults descriptively and graphically. The use of VOS Viewer®,
MATLAB®, and Tableau® facilitated the creation of intuitive
graphical representations to help understand the data. Our
analysis process with these tools involved examining trends,
correlations, and patterns in the data following our research
questions. This process aids in formulating comprehensive
insights, which are then detailed in the subsequent sections.
IV. R ESULTS
This section provides insights from examining the 60 se-
lected candidate studies focused on bioinspiration and 24
candidate articles focused on using soft robotics in education.
A. Bioinspiration Categories in the Field of Education
To answer RQ1 (“What fields of bioinspiration are covered
within education?”), we analyzed the 60 records screened
records before analyzing exclusively those focused on soft
robotics as depicted in Fig. 2. The distribution of studies as
per their respective bioinspiration categories, which respond to
RQ1, is depicted in Fig. 3. The field with the most substantial
coverage is locomotion, accounting for 45% (27 out of 60)
of the papers [66]–[88]. This field of biomechanics is pre-
dominantly addressed through the creation or application of a
robot that emulates animal-like motion in terms of kinematics
or dynamics, despite using rigid components. Consequently,
this does not necessarily imply the use of compliance or
biomimetics.
The second most prevalent category is soft robotics, whose
unique attributes are elaborated upon in the fifth and sixth
research questions (RQ5 and RQ6). Bioinspired control forms
the third domain, being closely associated with neuroscience,
and encompasses eight papers whose primary focus is the
formulation of neuromechanical control strategies. Examples
include the application of swarm optimization [89]–[91], neu-
ral networks [92]–[94], Braitenberg vehicle behavior [95], and
genetic algorithms [96]. A single paper about the domain of
human-robot interaction in education, exploring biomimetics
through the actions of an android that displays human-like
behaviors [97].
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6
Fig. 3. Areas of bioinspiration covered in education.
B. Main Keywords
To answer RQ2 (“What are the main keywords?”), we
analyzed the screened 24 records presented in Fig. 2 focused
exclusively on soft robotics in education. This section and
those that follow focus on soft robotics, constituting 24 of
the 60 records surveyed in this study. The word cloud in Fig.
4 collates the index keywords to address Research Question
2 (RQ2). Notably, the keywords demonstrate soft robotics in
education’s interdisciplinary essence, encapsulating materials
science, electronics, robotics, engineering design, computing,
and education. Even though bioinspiration and educational
robotics form the bedrock of this study, they do not emerge
as the most frequently appearing terms. Nevertheless, related
concepts like biomimetics and engineering education surface
consistently. Most keywords can be categorized into four
sections: 1. Education and Outreach, 2. Design, 3. Materials
and Fabrication, and 4. Electronics, Computing, and Actuation.
The “Education and Outreach” category covers terms perti-
nent to pedagogical methods, stages of education, and learning
subjects. This includes keywords such as educational robotics,
engineering education, educational resources, K-12, students,
high school teachers, curricula, STEM, teaching module, com-
putational thinking, career interest, student motivation, gender
disparities, and women’s role in engineering.
The “Design” category encompasses both an engineering
essence and the influence of biomimicry. It comprises key-
words such as product design, machine design, anthropomor-
phic models, biomimetic robotic fish, design-based learning,
design-based research, design competitions, design experience,
and design variations.
The “Materials and Fabrication” category pictures the tech-
nologies employed, especially those emulating diverse biolog-
ical systems. This leads to the creation of robots exhibiting
more organic, softer, and lifelike movements. Keywords in this
category include 3D Printers, biomaterials, biocompatibility,
biomimetic materials, composite materials, polymers, silicone,
elastic properties, biodegradation, foam, compliant systems,
and smart textiles.
Lastly, the “Electronics, Computing, and Actuation” cate-
Fig. 4. Word cloud of index keywords.
gory includes terms critical to the system’s mobility, control,
and functionality. They encompass Arduino, pneumatics, end-
effectors, EAPs, ionic polymer-metal composites, grippers,
control systems, data collection, data technologies, embedded
systems, high-level languages, open-source projects, open-
source software, and software toolkits.
We utilized the VOS viewer software to elucidate the
relationships among different keywords. This software facili-
tated the creation of a co-occurrence network of keywords,
including those that appeared a minimum of seven times.
This network is depicted in Fig. 5, highlighting the temporal
emergence of each keyword. The co-occurrence network con-
sidered keywords that appeared at least seven times. The years
displayed in Fig. 5 only covered from 2015 to 2019, since
within those years, the displayed terms appeared a minimum
of seven times. That is why all the years considered in this
review (i.e., from 2006 to 2022) are not shown in Fig. 5. The
significance of robotics, engineering education, and students
is consistently underscored. A historical examination of key-
word usage reveals that terms such as robots, biomimetics,
bioinspired robots, and education were frequently employed
in academic publications circa 2015. A key observation is that
“robots” and “education” were initially used as separate key-
words. However, the term “educational robotics” has gradually
emerged as a pivotal concept in contemporary literature.
Moreover, some keyword relationships appeared weaker
than expected. For instance, despite “soft robotics” being
linked with “engineering education”, it doesn’t exhibit a
strong association with “biomimetics” or “bioinspired robots”,
concepts that are fundamentally integral to the field of soft
robotics. Lastly, “design”, whether referred to directly or
as “machine design”, which may indicate a more specific
evolution of the term, consistently exhibits strong connections
with all other keywords, thereby confirming its central role
within this domain.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7
Fig. 5. Co-terms network.
Fig. 6. Number of publications by year and country.
C. Geographical and Temporal Distribution of Research in
Soft Robotics Education
To address RQ3 (“When was the research published, and
what is the geographical location of the authors ?”), an
examination of the temporal and geographical distribution of
the compiled records relevant to soft robotics in education was
conducted. The origin of research in this field can be traced
back to 2006, as evidenced by a singular article published
by Tan et al. [98]. This initial article succeeded in [54], as
illustrated in Fig. 6. Following a hiatus in research activity, a
revival was noticed in 2013, and since then, there has been
a consistent annual publication of at least one article. Recent
years have witnessed a constant and sometimes upward trend
in research output, reaching its pinnacle in 2017. Notably, this
apex corresponded with the publication of three articles from
the same research group [61], [99], [100].
Turning to the geographical spread of the research, Fig. 6
highlights the conspicuous predominance of the United States,
which is credited with 19 out of the total 24 records. This
overwhelming presence overshadows other countries, even
against the flurry of publications in 2017. The remaining
articles originate from four separate nations: Denmark [63],
Germany [57], Taiwan [65], and Switzerland [55], [56]. These
publications indicate a geographical concentration of research
within Central Europe and the United States, thus identifying
the principal activity centers in Soft Robotics Education.
Fig. 7. Educational levels impacted by soft robotics.
D. Education Levels Impacted by Soft Robotics
To address RQ4, (“What educational level is being impacted
by the technology?”), We analyzed each of the 24 screened
records and labeled them within three categories: K-12, higher
education, and the general public (i.e., composed of K-12,
higher education, and research students). Fig. 7 shows the
educational levels where soft robotics in education has been
implemented. K-12 education, encompassing both elementary
and high schools, accounts for a clear majority, making up
two-thirds of the records [9], [52], [53], [59], [61], [63]–[65],
[98]–[104]. Higher education comes next, constituting 25%,
where both undergraduate and graduate students have been
impacted [54]–[56], [105]–[107]. The general public, which
encompasses K-12, higher education, and research, make up
the remaining 8.3% [57], [58].
E. Approach Type
Regarding the pedagogical approach that soft robotics has
adopted in education, in response to RQ5 (“What is the
approach the technology has towards education ?”), the 24
screened articles were analyzed and grouped into R&D and
hands-on approaches. Fig. 8 illustrates the distribution of both
approaches according to the 24 sampled studies. Firstly, hands-
on learning, accounting for 50% of the 24 records [52]–
[56], [59], [63]–[65], [100], [101], [103], primarily involves
situations where students or participants are introduced to the
subject and subsequently asked to design and construct a robot
using SAMs. The second category, R&D, comprises 37.5%
[57], [58], [60], [98], [99], [102], [104]–[106], and pertains to
the development of a fabrication process, material, or system
that can be later applied to soft robotics in education. The
category of Didactic Tools encompasses two unique cases
(8.3%). The study by [9] is centered on developing a platform,
SeaPerch II, to introduce soft robotics to younger students,
emphasizing marine applications. In the second case, SAMs
are employed to create an instructional platform to teach a
distinct subject, precisely respiratory physiology [107]. Lastly,
the remaining category includes a single study in which
the authors summarize their findings within soft robotics in
education [61].
F . Soft Robotics Technology
Concerning RQ6 (“What type of soft artificial muscle is
being employed?”), we collected the utilized SAM in each
of the 24 selected studies. Fig. 9 illustrates that, to date,
only five types have been utilized: PAMs, IPMCs, textiles,
paper-based systems, and elastic support elements. Among
these, PAMs dominate with 58.3% of the records [52], [55],
[58]–[61], [64], [99]–[103], [105], [107]. Textiles [63], [65],
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8
Fig. 8. Type of approach employed in Soft Robotics in Education.
Fig. 9. Types of Soft Artificial Muscles technology used in Soft Robotics in
Education.
IPMCs focused on robotic fish [54], [98], and Elastic support
elements [53], [56] each appear twice in the 24 records. In
the latter case, it was observed that materials such as silicone
rubber or even glue are utilized to create compliant structures
without necessarily creating PAMs as traditionally applied.
However, in this context, they do not strictly fall under SAMs
compared to the rest. Paper actuation is explored in a single
record where the actuation resulting from water application is
used to drive a system [57]. Three articles do not focus on
a singular technology but explore multiple types from those
already mentioned by working on new platforms or toolkits
[9], [104], [106].
G. Soft Robotics Activities in Education
Regarding RQ7 (“What kind of educational activities have
been carried out with soft robotics?”), we analyzed the activi-
ties the authors conducted to test the developed soft robots. For
this RQ and RQ8, particular emphasis is placed on a hands-
on approach covered by 50% of the selected articles. Of the
twelve articles analyzed, ten required participants to design
their own SAM or structure based on given specifications
[53]–[56], [59], [63], [65], [100], [101], [103]. For instance,
there is a case in which the locomotion of a robot must be
improved by modifying the morphology, dynamics, and gait
with the use of soft components [56]. However, it is crucial to
note that all the articles necessitate participant involvement
Fig. 10. Types of hands-on activities for Soft Robotics in Education
in fabricating the actuator or structure. Consequently, two
articles concentrate solely on fabricating a pre-defined system
[52], [64]. Particularly in the case of PAMs, the utilization
of silicone rubber materials like EcoFlex™ is widespread. In
addition, two articles encompassing both design and fabrica-
tion extend the scope of the SAM development process by
requiring students to implement the activation code for their
SAM [63], [65].
H. Validation methods for Soft Robotics in Education
Regarding RQ8 (“What has been the main methodology or
validation procedure to evaluate the effect of soft robotics in
education?”). In this context, the hands-on approach necessi-
tates continuous monitoring of participants as they engage in
activities. This highlights the imperative to identify alternative
methods to evaluate their impact. Various researchers have
proposed assessing the influence of soft robotics on students
by scrutinizing their perceptions. Typically, this assessment is
conducted using instruments such as surveys, questionnaires,
or tests which students complete post-interaction with the
soft robots or soft robotic platforms [52], [53], [56], [59],
[64], [65], [100], [101], [103]. In line with this, many studies
advocate using pre- and post-activity surveys to ascertain
students’ perceptions after interacting with soft robotics. One
particularly innovative strategy that has been employed for this
purpose is the adaptation of the Draw-A-Scientist Test (DAST)
into two distinct formats: the Draw-an-Engineer Test (DAET)
and the Draw a Robot Task (DART) survey [52], [53]. These
modifications allow for a more in-depth analysis of students’
engagement and creativity, even incorporating considerations
of gender perspectives [108].
In instances where surveys were not employed as the pri-
mary means of evaluation, an alternative method has been used
to measure the influence of soft robotics on the development
of engineering competencies. Instead of assessing participants’
perceptions, this approach focuses on gauging the performance
and effectiveness of the proposed soft robotics prototypes [54],
[55]. This assessment is achieved by conducting task-based
evaluations where students utilize soft robots for problem-
solving, providing a direct measure of learning outcomes and
skills development. These studies highlight the multifaceted
nature of educational assessments and emphasize the potential
of soft robotics as innovative educational tools in the engi-
neering domain.
Notably, in one particular study [63], observational assess-
ments were the sole method employed to validate the impact.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9
TABLE IV
RECORDS COVERING SOFT ROBOTICS
Author Title Year Document
Type Country Type of
actuator
Level
impacted
Ap-
proach
E. McNeela
et al. [52]
Understanding Impacts of Soft Robotics Project on Female Students’
Perceptions of Engineering (Work in Progress) 2022 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM K-12 Hands-on
A. Garcia-
Langleyet al.
[9]
Development of Educational Marine Soft Robotics STEM Platform
as New Iteration of SeaPerch K-12 National Outreach Program2022 Conference
Paper
United
States Multiple K-12 Didactic
tool
S. Lameret
al. [53]
Using Drawings to Understand Impacts of Soft Robotics Activity on
Elementary Age Students’ Perceptions of Robots 2022 Conference
Paper
United
States
Elastic support
elements K-12 Hands-on
S. Poppinga
et al. [57]
Self-actuated paper and wood models: Low-cost handcrafted
biomimetic compliant systems for research and teaching 2021 Article Germany Paper- based General
public R&D
A. Jacksonet
al. [59] Increasing gender diversity in engineering using soft robotics2021 Article United
States PAM K-12 Hands-on
A.H. Greeret
al. [60]
Soluble Polymer Pneumatic Networks and a Single-Pour System for
Improved Accessibility and Durability of Soft Robotic Actuators2021 Article United
States PAM K-12 R&D
A.
Shtarbanov
FlowIO Development Platform - The Pneumatic Raspberry Pi for
Soft Robotics 2021 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM General
public R&D
M.A. Horvath
et al. [107] An organosynthetic soft robotic respiratory simulator 2020 Article United
States PAM Higher
education
Didactic
tool
B.K.M.K.
Pedersenet
al. [63]
Fabric robotics - lessons learned introducing soft robotics in a
computational thinking course for children 2020 Conference
Paper Denmark Textile K-12 Hands-on
A. Jacksonet
al. [101]
Pilot analysis of the impacts of soft robotics design on high-school
student engineering perceptions 2019 Article United
States PAM K-12 Hands-on
A.N. Sardesai
et al. [102] Design and Characterization of Edible Soft Robotic Candy Actuators2018 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM K-12 R&D
J. Zhanget
al. [103]
A modular, reconfigurable mold for a soft robotic gripper design
activity 2017 Article United
States PAM K-12 Hands-on
A. Jacksonet
al. [99] Taking soft robotics from the laboratory to the classroom 2017 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM K-12 R&D
A. Jacksonet
al. [100] Enhancing student motivation and efficacy through soft robot design2017 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM K-12 Hands-on
A.C.-Y . Chen
and Y .-C.
Lin. [65]
Girls in robot classsmart textiles interactive tool-kits to enhance the
participatory of women in technology 2017 Conference
Paper Taiwan Textile K-12 Hands-on
A. Jacksonet
al. [61]
Design-based research and soft robotics to broaden the STEM
pipeline 2017 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM K-12 Other
A. Argiolaset
al. [105] Sculpting Soft Machines 2016 Article United
States PAM Higher
education R&D
D.P. Holland
et al. [106]
The development and testing of the Soft Robotics Toolkit: An
educational resource for mechanical engineering design 2015 Conference
Paper
United
States Multiple Higher
education R&D
D.P. Holland
et al. [104]
The Soft Robotics Toolkit: Shared Resources for Research and
Design 2014 Article United
States Multiple K-12 R&D
D. Rossiet
al. [55]
Soft Robotics for Architects: Integrating Soft Robotics Education in
an Architectural Context 2014 Article Switzerland PAM Higher
education Hands-on
B. Finioet al.
[64] Air-powered soft robots for K-12 classrooms 2013 Conference
Paper
United
States PAM K-12 Hands-on
X. Yuet al.
[56] Robotics education: A case study in soft-bodied locomotion 2013 Conference
Paper Switzerland Elastic support
elements
Higher
education Hands-on
X. Tanet al.
[54]
A hands-on paradigm for EAP education: Undergraduates,
pre-college students, and beyond 2007 Conference
Paper
United
States IPMC Higher
education Hands-on
X. Tanet al.
[98] An autonomous robotic fish for mobile sensing 2006 Conference
Paper
United
States IPMC K-12 R&D
Fig. 11. Validation methods for hands-on activities in Soft Robotics in
Education
Despite this, the study’s key insights and findings were metic-
ulously presented. Consequently, these multifaceted methods
collectively contribute to a comprehensive understanding of
the role and efficacy of soft robotics in education.
I. Open Questions and Future Work considering the identified
advantages and disadvantages
To answer RQ9 (“Considering the identified advantages and
disadvantages, what open questions and future areas of re-
search exist related to the use of soft robotics in education?”),
we examined the conclusions and future work proposed by the
24 articles under consideration. Our review revealed that recent
studies have concentrated their future research on two primary
aspects. The first aspect involves an ongoing effort to refine
the proposed soft robotic platform designed for educational
use [9], [54]–[56], [58], [60], [64], [98], [104], [107]. This
focus stems from the observation that the simplicity and
accessibility of the current methodology or platforms invite
further investigation into how soft robots can be enhanced
or improved in their design and features to better serve as
educational tools.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10
The second area of interest focuses on the ongoing vali-
dation of the proposed soft robotics platform or soft robot,
in association with various student groups [52], [53], [56],
[59], [61], [65], [99]–[101], [103]. The main objective of these
studies is to refine approaches to measure the efficacy of soft
robots in pedagogical contexts, targeting a broad audience
spectrum that includes K-12 students as well as undergraduate
and postgraduate learners. These studies validate the real-
world application of soft robotics in education, emphasizing
these tools’ hands-on, engaging, and flexible nature. How-
ever, it is essential to note that there have been instances
where the authors of certain studies have not indicated any
future directions for their research [57], [63], [102], [105].
Furthermore, we found no explicit limitations or drawbacks
associated with using soft robotics in education in most of
the reviewed articles. Nevertheless, in the study by [63], it is
argued that rigid robotics could be seen as more reconfigurable
and more straightforward to operate and debug than their soft
counterparts. Despite this, soft robotics’s unique advantages
and critical benefits are underscored.
V. D ISCUSSION
The RQs of the present SLR aim to provide an overview
of fields of bioinspiration covered within education, the main
concepts associated with soft robotics in education, when and
where studies have been developed to study the use of soft
robotics in education, the educational levels in which soft
robots have been utilized, the approaches toward education,
the SAMs employed, the educational activities design to use
them, and their validation procedures. The review considered
24 peer-reviewed journal and conference articles published
between the years 2006 to 2022 to provide evidence of the
use of soft robotics in education. This literature differs from
other reviews on educational robotics since they mainly focus
on conventional rigid robots instead of discussing the use of
soft robotics in education. The screened articles were grouped
and analyzed to respond to each RQ presented in Table I.
A. Regarding the First Research Question
Based on the results presented in Fig. 2, it is possible to
observe that only 95 records passed to the first screening
process, a low value if we consider that the search query
included terms that sought to be broad while being selective
at the same time (see Table II). When we narrow the search
terms to only include education and only keep robot* AND
(bio-insp* OR bioinsp* OR biomim* OR “artificial muscle”
OR “soft robot*”), the number of records in SCOPUS sur-
passes 20,000. With this volume of results, bioinspired robotic
systems in education account for less than 0.5% of the total
research. It is true that the inclusion and exclusion criteria
limit the results and that some modifications in the search
query could show a larger proportion of results regarding
education. However, the percentage could rarely increase to
more than 2%. An increase in research on bioinspired robotics,
perhaps not directly focused on education, but considering it,
is required and can be highly beneficial to broaden the mindset
of future engineers and scientists.
Locomotion, bioinspired control, and soft robotics represent
major areas of bioinspired robotics in education. Fig. 3 shows
that locomotion has the most significant percentage by a slight
margin, although it mainly focuses on legged robots and their
biomechanics. This result can be expected since locomotion
has been one of the first and most fundamental areas addressed
by research on robotics, along with the fact that it is even
one of the unique bioinspired aspects covered by educational
robots or platforms, from which LEGO Mindstorms® stands
out as an example [17]. Incorporating more diverse forms of
bioinspired mechanisms and areas, such as bioinspired sensing
or actuation, can broaden students’ interest in the field.
Although bioinspired control is closely related to locomo-
tion (e.g., gait generation), it has not been extensively explored
in bioinspired robotics in education. Research in this area is
closely related to neuroscience, specifically in neuromechan-
ics, which is less than half that of locomotion, as shown in Fig.
3. Moreover, it concentrates on using neural networks, without
explicitly applying Central Pattern Generators, a tool widely
employed to perform locomotion [26]. Developing dedicated
tools and processes to teach bioinspired control can benefit
higher education.
Despite being relatively recent in its conception, soft
robotics has a vital role in bioinspired robotics in education.
This can be noted in Fig. 3 by being in a closed second
place with 40%, just 5% below locomotion, and three times
the preponderance of bioinspired control. The fact that many
soft robotics actuator paradigms are low-cost and relatively
simple to manufacture [3] favors their direct and natural
implementation in education. A further impulse in soft robotics
in education could make this field prominent and widely
implemented when introducing robotics to science and engi-
neering students.
B. Regarding the Second Research Question
The keyword analysis reveals the remarkable transdisci-
plinary nature of soft robotics, spanning science, technology,
education, and even social aspects. Regarding science and
technology, Soft robotics in education covers various topics,
such as materials, electronics, actuators, fabrication methods,
and biomimetics. The data also emphasizes design-related
terms and “engineering education”, which highlight both theo-
retical and practical skills crucial for comprehensive engineer-
ing training. Even though “biology” or “bioinspiration” are
not explicitly listed as keywords, the inclusion of a variety
of biology-related terms bridges this gap, suggesting areas
that roboticists can explore to enhance and propose innovative
designs and solutions.
Another notable aspect, discernible from the title, abstract,
and frequent mention in keywords, is promoting STEM in-
terest among young and female students. This observation
underscores the fundamental role of soft robotics in education.
If integrated at early stages of education, soft robotics in
education could enhance scientific and engineering skills and
address persisting gender disparities. This potential growth
could raise the profile of soft robotics in education in future
curricula, particularly in courses that emphasize hands-on
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11
workshops imparting practical skills. This development should
be considered by educators and policymakers who are aiming
to revolutionize the teaching of technology. Introducing and
expanding such courses can stimulate students’ curiosity and
foster their interest in this dynamic field.
Moreover, the co-occurrence analysis presented in Fig. 5
suggests that soft robotics can provide a powerful impetus for
a constructivist and constructionism approach to engineering
education due to its link with the term educational robots since,
as mentioned in the Background Section of this study, robotics
in education follows the constructivism and constructionism
theories of learning [11]. While the co-occurrence network in
Fig. 5 does not illustrate a direct link between soft robotics and
teaching, it is intricately connected to students. Interestingly,
these keywords have become increasingly prominent in recent
years, contrasting with traditional terms such as “robots”
and “teaching”. This student-centered approach (due to its
foundations in constructivism and constructionism), paired
with active, experiential learning, supports the escalating trend
of “learning by doing”, a concept vigorously promoted by
educational robotics as discussed by Schina et al. [12]. With
this in mind, soft robotics in education could be vital in
accelerating the shift from traditional pedagogical methods to
more engaging, interactive, and student-centered educational
approaches. Doing so could empower learners to develop
essential skills such as critical thinking, problem-solving, and
creativity, which are invaluable in the ever-evolving engineer-
ing field [109].
C. Regarding the Third Research Question
Soft robotics as a field of study in education is relatively
new, and it has mainly been developed in the United States.
The first article on soft robotics in education was published 15
years ago, as shown in Fig. 6. There was a lack of literature
on this topic for five years until 2013, which marked the
beginning of a new era, with an average of fewer than three
results. The increase in publications in 2021 could indicate a
growing trend in soft robotics in education. However, despite
this increase in publications, only a few studies have explored
the use of soft robotics for educational purposes. Moreover,
the presence of the United States with constant research
throughout all years where there have been publications can be
attributed to two reasons: the first one is its prolific scientific
production that certainly touches a vast number of fields, and
the second is the existence of initiatives from universities such
as Purdue [59], [61], [99]–[101], or Harvard [104], which look
to expand soft robotics in education. The most evident example
is the Soft Robotics Toolkit initiative. This platform invites
students and makers to explore, design, and create this robotic
system in terms of actuation and sensing [110]. It is important
to note that all research covered comes from highly developed
countries, but the experiences and know-how provided could
set the stage for expansion to broader regions of the world.
On the other hand, it is worth noting that the amount of
research in which soft robots have been used for educational
purposes is low compared to that of rigid robots. The above
can be observed in the number of studies and reviews that
have focused on the use of rigid robotics as in [28]–[30]. Fur-
thermore, recent studies have developed educational platforms
composed primarily of rigid robots [20], [21], [23], [111],
[112]. The above suggests that while robotics has been an
element of interest in recent years, soft robotics are underused
as an educational platform.
D. Regarding the Fourth Research Question
Based on the results presented in Fig. 7, soft robots have
been primarily used in K-12 students; nevertheless, their
use in higher educational levels has been under-explored.
While it is beneficial to continue encouraging soft robotics
in education implementation in K-12 and high schools to
foster STEM interest [9], undergraduate education must also
develop its unique methodologies and platforms to solidify
further research in graduate degrees [54]. The above highlights
the need for developing activities in which undergraduate
and graduate students could use soft robotics and, conse-
quently, studies that verify its implementation and higher
educational levels. Another aspect to point out is that since
soft robotics is mainly used for the K-12 level, the activities
that could be implemented could be limited due to the lack
of theoretical background that K-12 students have related to
mechanical design, material properties, embedded systems,
and programming. Thus, studies can be developed to test
soft robotics at undergraduate and graduate levels to design
activities for more complex topics such as control engineering,
artificial intelligence, embedded systems design, and physical
and mathematical modeling [113]–[115]. In addition, this lack
of implementation of soft robotics at higher educational levels
is a gap also presented by rigid robots where most of their use
is for children or K-12 students [32], in which few works have
explored the use of robotics tools at higher educational levels
[21], [23]. Hence, the development of studies that employed
educational robotics at undergraduate and graduate levels is an
aspect that could contribute to the overall field of educational
robotics.
E. Regarding the Fifth Research Question
Fig. 8 indicates that only 37.5% of the records pertain to
R&D, significantly lower than the 50% attributed to hands-
on activities. Moreover, only a handful of articles focus on
developing novel methods, materials, or systems that address
the engineering aspects of soft robots use in education, which
can also be observed in Table IV. Progress in this area
could generate a platform, potentially transforming it into the
LEGO® equivalent in soft robotics. In this regard, an open-
access platform for soft robotics similar to the Soft Robotics
Toolkit presented by Holland et al. [104] is an area that could
be tackled by generating R&D studies, which could increase
the use of soft robotics in education by performing hands-
on approaches. It is noteworthy that SeaPerch II, is already
leveraging the advantages of soft robotics in education as
a dedicated didactic tool [9]. In this regard, it is crucial
to continue developing studies that combine both R&D and
hands-on approaches since, on the one hand, R&D serves
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12
to create a new soft robotics platform. In contrast, hands-
on approaches allow testing the platform with students and
validating its effectiveness [56], [65], [100], [101]. Thus, both
approaches cannot be treated exclusively.
F . Regarding the Sixth Research Question
Regarding SAMs, PAMs are the most widely used in
educational settings. According to Fig. 9, 58.3% of the to-
tal soft robotics in education-related records were based on
PAMs. This prevalence is mainly due to their straightforward
manufacturing and testing process, which does not necessi-
tate specialized materials or tools [116]. By using silicone
rubber, molds, and a source of pressurized air, students can
easily test the behavior of their muscles. Textiles also offer a
user-friendly introduction to SAMs, though their application
range is constrained due to their limited force and activation
frequency. On the other hand, EAPs are primarily limited to
IPMCs, which require activation voltages around 5V , starkly
contrasting the kilovolt range for DEAs. IPMCs’ need to
operate in aqueous environments explains the selection of
bioinspired soft robotics based on fish morphology. It is
important to note that safety and operating conditions are
paramount considerations when designing soft robotics for
education and may limit their applications, primarily when
intended for close human interaction.
G. Regarding the Seventh Research Question
As noted by Yu et al. [24], when traditional rigid robots
are utilized for educational purposes, their primary role is in
control tasks, such as programming. However, rigid robot kits
often overlook other vital aspects of robotic design, including
mechanical and material properties considerations.
In contrast, as evident from the data presented in Fig.
10, soft robotics has fostered the expansion of educational
activities beyond just programming. Fabrication and design of
soft robots have become commonplace activities in this field. It
is noteworthy, however, that programming activities seem to be
less frequently undertaken in the context of soft robotics. This
suggests a broader range of educational activities facilitated
by soft robotics compared to traditional rigid robots, primarily
used for programming. Furthermore, studies such as that of Yu
et al. [56] have introduced activities where improvements in
robot locomotion are achieved through proposed variations in
mechanical designs and material properties, rather than solely
through enhancements in programming. Similarly, Zhang et
al. [103] proposed using soft robots to enable students to
understand how design choices influence system performance.
The studies above highlight the expansive range of activities
that can be developed via soft robotics.
Despite this progress, it is crucial to underscore that the
symbiotic relationship between mechanical design and pro-
gramming has not been exhaustively explored as a cross-
cutting process. This omission identifies a significant op-
portunity that would encapsulate the complete process of
designing a robotic system, thereby broadening the scope of
educational activities and enriching the learning experience.
Furthermore, Chen et al. [65] noted that K-12 students find
it more challenging to program soft robots than select their
materials; this suggests that equal emphasis should be given to
fabrication and programming tasks when designing activities
via soft robots.
H. Regarding the Eighth Research Question
According to the data presented in Fig. 11, surveys emerge
as the most commonly employed tool for evaluating the
influence of soft robotics and their potential to shift students’
viewpoints on a particular subject matter. While surveys are
valuable for understanding learners’ perceptions and attitudes,
they may not necessarily provide objective measures to de-
termine the extent of new knowledge acquired [117], [118].
Direct observation, another evaluation method identified in the
review, could also suffer from a similar lack of objectivity
unless guided by well-defined parameters [118]. Additionally,
conducting observations without a structured evaluation rubric
may unintentionally introduce personal bias or subjectivity.
This potential bias might compromise the validity of the
collected data, underscoring the necessity for structured and
standardized observation practices to ensure reliable and ac-
curate results.
However, at higher educational levels, assessing the perfor-
mance of student-created prototypes provides a more tangible
and objective measure of understanding and learning. This
form of evaluation allows a more precise assessment of
students’ comprehension of the subject matter and enables
the clear identification of acquired engineering competencies.
Such an approach might include assessing the design process,
the functionality of the completed prototype, and its resilience
under various conditions.
It is essential to highlight that most of the research has
been focused on evaluating the students’ perceptions rather
than directly measuring the learning outcomes that can be
accomplished using the technology. For instance, studies that
have focused on the use of rigid robots in education have
mainly been concerned with evaluating the motivation and
learning interest that robotics could have on the students [111].
Nevertheless, contrasting the students’ learning outcomes with
the proposed soft robotics has been underperformed. Hence,
future work should be focused on analyzing the potential
learning outcomes that soft robotics could enhance, such as
those proposed by Bloom’s Taxonomy [119].
Given the potential limitations of surveys and observation,
combining assessment methods might provide a more holistic
understanding of students’ learning outcomes. Such a multi-
faceted approach might involve pairing surveys or interviews
with performance evaluations of prototypes and other objective
measures. Furthermore, future research could explore the
development of more refined, objective measures for assessing
the efficacy of soft robotics in education, thereby contributing
to a more nuanced understanding of learning in this field. For
example, Orlando et al. [120] proposed using a conjunctive
knowledge tracing model based on a hidden Markov model
in a web-based learning environment to provide teachers with
information about student learning progress during a physics
class. Similar methodologies could be incorporated into soft
robotics in education to evaluate its effectiveness.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13
I. Regarding the Ninth Research Question
The continuing evolution of soft robotics in education
necessitates a twofold approach: the consistent refinement
of existing platforms and methodologies and a comprehen-
sive evaluation of its educational impact as presented in
Section IV-I. On one side of this dichotomy, the simplicity
and accessibility of the methods and materials employed in
soft robotics present considerable advantages. However, these
same features simultaneously raise challenges compared to
the reconfigurability and ease of use typically associated with
rigid educational robots. This contrast highlights a crucial
open question: How can we enhance the reconfigurability and
debuggability of soft robotics to meet or even exceed that of
their rigid counterparts? It is crucial to note that this added
complexity, despite being a challenge, could offer an enriching
opportunity for cultivating engineering and scientific skills.
Moreover, it may also stimulate further innovation within the
field.
On the other side, there is an urgent need to evaluate the
effectiveness of these technologies on student outcomes. To
this end, it would be advantageous to integrate soft robotics
more extensively into actual robotics courses across a broad
spectrum of educational levels. This integration should span K-
12 to higher education, enabling the perception of and actual
learning from these technologies to be rigorously evaluated
and validated. Furthermore, the widespread diffusion of this
topic could present an excellent opportunity to elevate interest
in the area among society, research communities, and govern-
ment bodies.
This review of prospective work and open questions un-
derscores the dynamic and swiftly evolving nature of the
field of soft robotics in education. As researchers continue
refining these tools and validating their applications, it is
paramount to maintain a balance between innovation and
practical effectiveness. The research community must actively
address the potential limitations of soft robotics, rather than
avoid them. These critical evaluations will prove instrumental
in guiding the field’s trajectory and establishing its practical
relevance in diverse educational contexts.
VI. S UGGESTED APPROACH FOR INTEGRATING SOFT
ROBOTICS IN EDUCATION
Drawing upon the findings from our analysis and the lack
of soft robots in education, we propose an initial framework
for incorporating soft robotics into educational curricula, as
illustrated in Fig. 12. The first step involves clearly defining the
educational level, the field of study, and the specific learning
objectives. It is important to recognize the scope for exploring
various concepts associated with science and engineering.
Science-related concepts might include biomechanical mod-
eling and materials science, while engineering-focused areas
could involve validating existing systems through experimental
design or even proposing innovative actuators or robot forms.
Once these learning objectives are established, a specific
SAM can be selected based on availability, safety, and cost.
For instance, hosting a workshop where students design their
systems may be an excellent introduction to the basics of
Fig. 12. Recommended steps to implement soft robotics in education.
soft robotics. This could potentially involve manufacturing
PAMs using silicone rubbers like EcoFlex™ or DragonSkin™
[121]. Advanced educational levels might delve deeper into
materials science challenges by implementing Ionic Polymer-
Metal Composites or SMAs.
The proposed activities should comprise a clear step-by-step
tutorial, yet retain enough flexibility to encourage students to
experiment with the technology. If the learning objective is
design-focused, Computer-Assisted Design and 3D printing
could be indispensable tools for creating molds. Engaging
students meaningfully can bolster their confidence and fos-
ter innovative problem-solving perspectives. Throughout the
activity, the role of the instructor is not merely to explain the
new concepts, but also to highlight the challenges and potential
areas of improvement that students may encounter firsthand.
Finally, it is crucial to document key experiences, challenges
encountered, and potential advice, while also identifying inno-
vative directions. This approach can assist future participants
and researchers in pushing the boundaries of soft robotics in
education through the creation of novel methodologies and
learning technologies.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work presented an SLR focused on using soft robotics
in education. Thanks to its inherently multidisciplinary char-
acter, bioinspired robotics holds significant potential as an
influential educational tool. It can introduce a wide array of
scientific and engineering concepts to future learners. Nev-
ertheless, this SRL divulged insufficient research on incor-
porating these progressive technologies into education. The
study delved into three core areas: locomotion, bioinspired
control, and soft robotics. These subjects could benefit greatly
from an expanded focus, embracing broader domains such as
bioinspired sensing and biomaterials. Developing a compre-
hensive educational platform that integrates these facets could
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14
signal a promising path forward for educational advancements
in this field. The findings from this review offer a valuable
point of departure for educational researchers and instructional
designers.
Focusing explicitly on soft robotics in education, the review
points to limited research regarding the volume of publications
and geographic coverage. However, soft robotics in education
is burgeoning with potential for development, marking it as an
emerging discipline with untapped opportunities for educators
and policymakers alike. The simplicity and cost-effectiveness
of certain soft robotics in education technologies, like PAMs,
make the field ripe for global adoption. This inclusive research
approach could help bridge gaps in regions traditionally side-
lined in technological research and educational innovation due
to financial constraints.
Every educational level can gain from soft robotics in
education, but considerable room for expansion remains, par-
ticularly at higher education levels that directly shape future re-
searchers. While various soft robotics in education approaches
offer unique benefits, it is essential to emphasize soft robotics
in education’s role as a hands-on educational tool to inspire
practical, experiential learning. Moreover, R&D of innova-
tive methods or technologies to advance SAMs represents a
tremendous opportunity. Such research should prioritize safety,
a vital aspect of these technological advancements. Our review
observed that while various SAMs exist, research primarily
centers on those presenting minimal user risk. With adequate
safety measures to mitigate inherent risks such as high voltages
associated with DEAs, their application in education or other
human-centric contexts will be unrestricted.
Refining existing methodologies and platforms in soft
robotics education presents an opportunity to develop solutions
that can compete with traditional rigid educational robots’ ease
of use and versatility. This process could amplify the skillset
related to soft robotics activities, including design, fabrication,
and programming tasks. Moreover, it is vital to verify soft
robotics’s effectiveness in education consistently. Combining
subjective metrics like students’ perceptions with objective
evaluations of a prototype’s performance using predefined
criteria is crucial for comprehensively assessing the field’s
educational impact.
Exploring a unified educational approach that concurrently
addresses mechanical design and programming in soft robotics
should be a key focus of future research. Additional studies
might also consider developing innovative, objective evalua-
tion methods to determine the effectiveness of soft robotics in
education, thus enriching our understanding of learning in this
emerging field. As soft robotics evolves, an important research
area will be enhancing these systems’ adaptability and fault
detection capabilities to match their rigid counterparts. Con-
tinuous assessment of these technologies’ impact on student
outcomes across different educational levels is also a crucial
future direction. The research community needs to balance the
drive for innovation with the need for practical effectiveness
as the field continues to grow. Researchers should thoughtfully
consider potential challenges while striving to harness soft
robotics’s vast educational potential fully.
In conclusion, this study lays a solid foundation for future
SLRs in soft robotics in education and offers a fundamental
blueprint for incorporating soft robotics into education. We
underscore the importance of starting with hands-on activities
geared toward both scientific and engineering exploration.
Educators could use this framework to introduce this emerging
technological trend to future scientists and engineers. Although
step-by-step tutorials can ease the initial learning process,
fostering an environment that encourages creative thinking
is equally essential. This approach advocates for a student-
centered learning environment and fuels the generation of
innovative ideas and designs. Documenting and critically
evaluating these learning experiences can help shape novel
pedagogical methodologies and lay the groundwork for future
soft robotics in education platforms.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Laschi, B. Mazzolai, and M. Cianchetti, “Soft robotics:
Technologies and systems pushing the boundaries of robot abilities,”
Science Robotics, vol. 1, no. 1, p. eaah3690, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.aah3690
[2] C. Majidi, “Soft robotics: A perspective—current trends and prospects
for the future,” Soft Robotics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–11, 2014. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2013.0001
[3] D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, “Design, fabrication and control of soft
robots,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 467–475, May 2015. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14543
[4] N. El-Atab, R. B. Mishra, F. Al-Modaf, L. Joharji, A. A.
Alsharif, H. Alamoudi, M. Diaz, N. Qaiser, and M. M. Hussain,
“Soft actuators for soft robotic applications: A review,” Advanced
Intelligent Systems , vol. 2, p. 2000128, 10 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aisy.202000128
[5] W. Dou, G. Zhong, J. Cao, Z. Shi, B. Peng, and L. Jiang, “Soft
robotic manipulators: Designs, actuation, stiffness tuning, and sensing,”
Advanced Materials Technologies, vol. 6, p. 2100018, 9 2021. [Online].
Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admt.202100018
[6] J. Walker, T. Zidek, C. Harbel, S. Yoon, F. S. Strickland, S. Kumar,
and M. Shin, “Soft robotics: A review of recent developments of
pneumatic soft actuators,” Actuators, vol. 9, no. 1, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-0825/9/1/3
[7] J. Bernat, P. Gajewski, J. Kołota, and A. Marcinkowska, “Review
of soft actuators controlled with electrical stimuli: Ipmc, deap, and
mre,” Applied Sciences , vol. 13, no. 3, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/3/1651
[8] E. W. Hawkes, L. H. Blumenschein, J. D. Greer, and A. M. Okamura,
“A soft robot that navigates its environment through growth,” Science
Robotics, vol. 2, no. 8, p. eaan3028, Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.aan3028
[9] A. Garcia-Langley, I. Alvarez, A. Chen, A. Li, H. Wang, D. Brancazio,
V . Gutierrez, A. Bennett, and M. Triantafyllou, “Development of
Educational Marine Soft Robotics STEM Platform as New Iteration
of SeaPerch K-12 National Outreach Program,” in OCEANS 2022,
Hampton Roads. Hampton Roads, V A, USA: IEEE, Oct. 2022, pp. 1–
8. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9977015/
[10] J. M. Angel-Fernandez and M. Vincze, “Towards a formal definition
of educational robotics,” in Proceedings of the Austrian Robotics
Workshop 2018. Innsbruck University Press, 7 2018, pp. 37–42.
[11] P. De Cristoforis, S. Pedre, M. Nitsche, T. Fischer, F. Pessacg,
and C. Di Pietro, “A Behavior-Based Approach for Educational
Robotics Activities,” IEEE Transactions on Education , vol. 56, no. 1,
pp. 61–66, Feb. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/6341861/
[12] D. Schina, V . Esteve-Gonz ´alez, and M. Usart, “An overview of
teacher training programs in educational robotics: characteristics,
best practices and recommendations,” Education and Information
Technologies, vol. 26, no. 3, p. 2831–2852, Nov. 2020. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10639-020-10377-z
[13] C. Chalmers, “Robotics and computational thinking in primary
school,” International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction , vol. 17,
pp. 93–100, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2212868917300235
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 15
[14] S. Atmatzidou and S. Demetriadis, “Advancing students’ computational
thinking skills through educational robotics: A study on age and gender
relevant differences,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 75, pp.
661–670, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0921889015002420
[15] T. Jagust, J. Cvetkovic-Lay, A. S. Krzic, and D. Sersic, “Using
robotics to foster creativity in early gifted education,” in Advances
in Intelligent Systems and Computing . Springer International
Publishing, Aug. 2017, p. 126–131. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-62875-2 11
[16] A. Eguchi, Bringing Robotics in Classrooms . Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2017, pp. 3–31. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57786-9 1
[17] L. Fortunati, A. M. Manganelli, and G. Ferrin, “Arts and crafts
robots or lego® mindstorms robots? a comparative study in
educational robotics,” International Journal of Technology and Design
Education, vol. 32, no. 1, p. 287–310, Jul. 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10798-020-09609-7
[18] M. S. d. S. Lopes, I. P. Gomes, R. M. P. Trindade, A. F. da Silva,
and A. C. d. C. Lima, “Web environment for programming and
control of a mobile robot in a remote laboratory,” IEEE Transactions
on Learning Technologies , vol. 10, no. 4, p. 526–531, Oct. 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2016.2627565
[19] F. A. Bravo and J. J. P ´aez, “Exploring the use of multiagent systems
in educational robotics activities,” IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, vol. 16, no. 6, p. 970–982, Dec. 2023. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2023.3277715
[20] M. Naya-Varela, S. Guerreiro-Santalla, T. Baamonde, and F. Bellas,
“Robobo smartcity: An autonomous driving model for computational
intelligence learning through educational robotics,” IEEE Transactions
on Learning Technologies , vol. 16, no. 4, p. 543–559, Aug. 2023.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2023.3244604
[21] L. Cehovin Zajc, A. Rezelj, and D. Skocaj, “Low-cost open-source
robotic platform for education,” IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 18–25, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2022.3224227
[22] S. Evripidou, A. Amanatiadis, K. Christodoulou, and
S. A. Chatzichristofis, “Introducing algorithmic thinking and
sequencing using tangible robots,” IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 93–105, Feb. 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2021.3058060
[23] J. E. Auerbach, A. Concordel, P. M. Kornatowski, and D. Floreano,
“Inquiry-based learning with robogen: An open-source software
and hardware platform for robotics and artificial intelligence,” IEEE
Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 356–369, Jul.
2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2018.2833111
[24] X. Yu, S. G. Nurzaman, U. Culha, and F. Iida, “Soft robotics
education,” Soft Robotics , vol. 1, no. 3, p. 202–212, Sep. 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/soro.2014.0009
[25] G. M. Whitesides, “Soft robotics,” Angewandte Chemie International
Edition, vol. 57, no. 16, p. 4258–4273, Mar. 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/anie.201800907
[26] K. Karakasiliotis, R. Thandiackal, K. Melo, T. Horvat, N. K.
Mahabadi, S. Tsitkov, J. M. Cabelguen, and A. J. Ijspeert, “From
cineradiography to biorobots: an approach for designing robots to
emulate and study animal locomotion,” Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, vol. 13, no. 119, p. 20151089, Jun. 2016. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.1089
[27] D. Shaikh and I. Ra ˜n´o, “Braitenberg vehicles as computational
tools for research in neuroscience,” Frontiers in Bioengineering
and Biotechnology , vol. 8, Sep. 2020. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.565963
[28] S. Jung and E.-s. Won, “Systematic review of research trends in
robotics education for young children,” Sustainability, vol. 10, no. 4,
p. 905, Mar. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
su10040905
[29] I. M. L. Souza, W. L. Andrade, L. M. R. Sampaio, and
A. L. S. O. Araujo, “A systematic review on the use of lego®
robotics in education,” in 2018 IEEE Frontiers in Education
Conference (FIE) . IEEE, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2018.8658751
[30] M. Riojas, S. Lysecky, and J. Rozenblit, “Educational technologies
for precollege engineering education,” IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 20–37, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2011.16
[31] T. Belpaeme, J. Kennedy, A. Ramachandran, B. Scassellati, and
F. Tanaka, “Social robots for education: A review,” Science Robotics,
vol. 3, no. 21, p. eaat5954, Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.aat5954
[32] E. Mangina, G. Psyrra, L. Screpanti, and D. Scaradozzi, “Robotics
in the Context of Primary and Pre-School Education: A Scoping
Review,”IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, pp. 1–10, 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10100903/
[33] E. Tzagkaraki, S. Papadakis, and M. Kalogiannakis, “Exploring the
Use of Educational Robotics in Primary School and Its Possible
Place in the Curricula,” in Education in & with Robotics to Foster
21st-Century Skills , M. Malvezzi, D. Alimisis, and M. Moro, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, vol. 982, pp. 216–229,
series Title: Studies in Computational Intelligence. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-77022-8 19
[34] I. Papadopoulos, R. Lazzarino, S. Miah, T. Weaver, B. Thomas, and
C. Koulouglioti, “A systematic review of the literature regarding
socially assistive robots in pre-tertiary education,” Computers &
Education, vol. 155, p. 103924, Oct. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0360131520301238
[35] F. B. V . Benitti, “Exploring the educational potential of robotics
in schools: A systematic review,” Computers & Education , vol. 58,
no. 3, pp. 978–988, Apr. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0360131511002508
[36] B. Zhong and L. Xia, “A Systematic Review on Exploring
the Potential of Educational Robotics in Mathematics Education,”
International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education ,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 79–101, Jan. 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10763-018-09939-y
[37] P. Tynj ¨al¨a, “Traditional studying for examination versus constructivist
learning tasks: Do learning outcomes differ?” Studies in Higher
Education, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 173–189, 1998. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079812331380374
[38] S. Papert, Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. USA:
Basic Books, Inc., 1980.
[39] D. Alimisis and C. Kynigos, “Constructionism and robotics in ed-
ucation,” in Teacher Education on Robotic-Enhanced Constructivist
Pedagogical Methods, D. Alimisis, Ed. Athens: ASPETE, 2009, pp.
11–26.
[40] E. Ackermann, “Piaget’s constructivism, papert’s constructionism:
What’s the difference,” Future of learning group publication , vol. 5,
no. 3, p. 438, 2001.
[41] S. Anwar, N. A. Bascou, M. Menekse, and A. Kardgar, “A Systematic
Review of Studies on Educational Robotics,” Journal of Pre-College
Engineering Education Research (J-PEER) , vol. 9, no. 2, Jul. 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/jpeer/vol9/iss2/2
[42] A. Gubenko, C. Kirsch, J. N. Smilek, T. Lubart, and C. Houssemand,
“Educational robotics and robot creativity: An interdisciplinary
dialogue,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 8, Jun. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2021.662030
[43] M. Apiola, M. Lattu, and T. A. Pasanen, “Creativity and intrinsic
motivation in computer science education,” in Proceedings of
the fifteenth annual conference on Innovation and technology in
computer science education . ACM, Jun. 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1822090.1822147
[44] J. Nemiro, C. Larriva, and M. Jawaharlal, “Developing creative
behavior in elementary school students with robotics,” The Journal of
Creative Behavior , vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 70–90, May 2015. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1002/jocb.87
[45] A. Verl, A. Albu-Sch ¨affer, O. Brock, and A. Raatz, Eds., Soft
Robotics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-44506-8
[46] O. Yasa, Y . Toshimitsu, M. Y . Michelis, L. S. Jones, M. Filippi,
T. Buchner, and R. K. Katzschmann, “An overview of soft
robotics,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous
Systems, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–29, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-control-062322-100607
[47] C. Lee, M. Kim, Y . J. Kim, N. Hong, S. Ryu, H. J. Kim, and S. Kim,
“Soft robot review,” International Journal of Control, Automation and
Systems, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–15, Feb 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12555-016-0462-3
[48] J. Mohd Jani, M. Leary, A. Subic, and M. A. Gibson, “A review
of shape memory alloy research, applications and opportunities,”
Materials & Design (1980-2015) , vol. 56, pp. 1078–1113, Apr.
2014. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0261306913011345
[49] M. Franke, A. Ehrenhofer, S. Lahiri, E.-F. M. Henke,
T. Wallmersperger, and A. Richter, “Dielectric Elastomer
Actuator Driven Soft Robotic Structures With Bioinspired
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16
Skeletal and Muscular Reinforcement,” Frontiers in Robotics
and AI , vol. 7, p. 510757, Dec. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frobt.2020.510757/full
[50] E. Acome, S. K. Mitchell, T. G. Morrissey, M. B. Emmett, C. Benjamin,
M. King, M. Radakovitz, and C. Keplinger, “Hydraulically amplified
self-healing electrostatic actuators with muscle-like performance,”
Science, vol. 359, no. 6371, pp. 61–65, Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aao6139
[51] M. J. Page, D. Moher, P. M. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, T. C. Hoffmann,
C. D. Mulrow, L. Shamseer, J. M. Tetzlaff, E. A. Akl, S. E.
Brennan, R. Chou, J. Glanville, J. M. Grimshaw, A. Hr ´objartsson,
M. M. Lalu, T. Li, E. W. Loder, E. Mayo-Wilson, S. McDonald,
L. A. McGuinness, L. A. Stewart, J. Thomas, A. C. Tricco, V . A.
Welch, P. Whiting, and J. E. McKenzie, “Prisma 2020 explanation
and elaboration: updated guidance and exemplars for reporting
systematic reviews,” BMJ, p. n160, 3 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bmj.com/lookup/doi/10.1136/bmj.n160
[52] H. Golecki, S. Lamer, E. McNeela, T. Tran, and A. Adnan, “Under-
standing impacts of soft robotics project on female students’ percep-
tions of engineering,” in 2022 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition ,
Minneapolis, MN, August 2022, work in Progress.
[53] S. Lamer, A. Adnan, E. McNeela, T. Tran, and H. Golecki, “Using
Drawings to Understand Impacts of Soft Robotics Activity on
Elementary Age Students’ Perceptions of Robots,” in 2022 IEEE
Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) . Uppsala, Sweden: IEEE,
Oct. 2022, pp. 1–5. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/9962417/
[54] X. Tan, D. Kim, E. Goodman, and M. Shahinpoor, “A hands-on
paradigm for eap education: undergraduates, pre-college students, and
beyond,” in SPIE Proceedings, Y . Bar-Cohen, Ed. SPIE, Apr. 2007.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.715724
[55] D. Rossi, Z. Nagy, and A. Schlueter, “Soft robotics for architects:
Integrating soft robotics education in an architectural context,” Soft
Robotics, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 147–153, Jun. 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/soro.2014.0006
[56] X. Yu, D. Assaf, L. Wang, and F. Iida, “Robotics education: A case
study in soft-bodied locomotion,” in2013 IEEE Workshop on Advanced
Robotics and its Social Impacts . IEEE, Nov. 2013, pp. 194–199.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ARSO.2013.6705528
[57] S. Poppinga, P. Schenck, O. Speck, T. Speck, B. Bruchmann,
and T. Masselter, “Self-actuated paper and wood models: Low-cost
handcrafted biomimetic compliant systems for research and teaching,”
Biomimetics, vol. 6, no. 3, p. 42, Jun. 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/biomimetics6030042
[58] A. Shtarbanov, “Flowio development platform – the pneumatic
“raspberry pi” for soft robotics,” in Extended Abstracts of the
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,
ser. CHI ’21. ACM, May 2021. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[59] A. Jackson, N. Mentzer, and R. Kramer-Bottiglio, “Increasing gender
diversity in engineering using soft robotics,” Journal of Engineering
Education, vol. 110, no. 1, p. 143–160, Jan. 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jee.20378
[60] A. H. Greer, E. King, E. H. Lee, A. N. Sardesai, Y . Chen, S. E.
Obuz, Y . Graf, T. Ma, D. Y . Chow, T. Fu, J. Somani, B. Schork,
Y . Sankuratri, T. Barnes, B. Broadus, C. Costner, and H. M. Golecki,
“Soluble polymer pneumatic networks and a single-pour system for
improved accessibility and durability of soft robotic actuators,” Soft
Robotics, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 144–151, Apr. 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/soro.2019.0133
[61] A. Jackson, J. Zhang, R. Kramer, and N. Mentzer, “Board # 96: Design-
based research and soft robotics to broaden the stem pipeline (work in
progress),” in 2017 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, Columbus,
Ohio, June 2017.
[62] S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, “Artificial muscles: Mechanisms,
applications, and challenges,” Advanced Materials , vol. 30, p.
1704407, 2 2018. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/adma.201704407
[63] B. K. M. K. Pedersen, E. Marchetti, A. Valente, and J. Nielsen,
Fabric Robotics - Lessons Learned Introducing Soft Robotics
in a Computational Thinking Course for Children . Springer
International Publishing, 2020, p. 499–519. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-50506-6 34
[64] B. Finio, R. Shepherd, and H. Lipson, “Air-powered soft robots
for k-12 classrooms,” in 2013 IEEE Integrated STEM Education
Conference (ISEC). IEEE, Mar. 2013, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISECon.2013.6525198
[65] A. C.-Y . Chen and Y .-C. Lin, “Girls in robot class smart textiles
interactive tool-kits to enhance the participatory of women in
technology,” in Learning and Collaboration Technologies. Technology
in Education , P. Zaphiris and A. Ioannou, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2017, pp. 134–147. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-58515-4 11
[66] M. Cassidy and G. Puttick, ““Because Subjects Don’t Exist in
a Bubble”: Middle School Teachers Enacting an Interdisciplinary
Curriculum,” Journal of Science Education and Technology , vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 233–245, Apr. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://link.
springer.com/10.1007/s10956-021-09951-y
[67] D. Bernstein, G. Puttick, K. Wendell, F. Shaw, E. Danahy,
and M. Cassidy, “Designing biomimetic robots: iterative
development of an integrated technology design curriculum,”
Educational technology research and development , vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 119–147, Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11423-021-10061-0
[68] J. Kidd, K. Kaipa, K. Gutierrez, M. J. Lee, P. Pazos, and
S. I. Ringleb, “COVID-19 as a Magnifying Glass: Exploring the
Importance of Relationships as Education Students Learn and Teach
Robotics via Zoom,” Journal of Pre-College Engineering Education
Research (J-PEER) , vol. 12, no. 2, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/jpeer/vol12/iss2/8
[69] T. R. Consi, D. Fan, and G. Jodin, “Fishbots: Bio-inspired marine
robots give students a hands-on introduction to fluid mechanics,” in
OCEANS 2019 MTS/IEEE SEATTLE . IEEE, Oct. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/OCEANS40490.2019.
8962580
[70] L. Garofalo, S. Sandler, and D. Seth, “Evaluation of a snake jaw
robot to teach integrated biology, mathematics, and engineering,” in
2020 IEEE Integrated STEM Education Conference (ISEC) . IEEE,
Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISEC49744.
2020.9280695
[71] S. Kashinath Narvekar, R. Bessariya, A. Sadananda, and K. Arya,
“Learn, build and compete: An aquatic robot-fish challenge,”
in 2020 3rd International Conference on Education Technology
Management, ser. ICETM 2020. ACM, Dec. 2020. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3446590.3446600
[72] O. Popescu, V . Jovanovic, K. Kaipa, K. Arcaute, and A. Dean, “Impact
of bioinspired robots on veterans pursuing stem degrees,” in2019 ASEE
Annual Conference & Exposition Proceedings . ASEE Conferences,
2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.18260/1-2--32925
[73] H. Vejdani, “Development of a bio-inspired robotics course,”
in 2019 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition Proceedings .
Tampa, Florida: ASEE Conferences, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18260/1-2--32647
[74] C. Telenko, K. Wood, K. Otto, M. Rajesh Elara, S. Foong,
K. Leong Pey, U.-X. Tan, B. Camburn, D. Moreno, and D. Frey,
“Designettes: An approach to multidisciplinary engineering design
education,” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol. 138, no. 2, Nov. 2015.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4031638
[75] F. Khoshnoud, I. I. Esat, R. H. C. Bonser, C. W. de Silva,
M. M. McKerns, and H. Owhadi, “Self-powered and bio-inspired
dynamic systems: Research and education,” in Volume 4A: Dynamics,
Vibration, and Control , ser. IMECE2016. American Society
of Mechanical Engineers, Nov. 2016. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1115/imece2016-65276
[76] R. Harbird, G. Barbareschi, E. Makrygianni, C. Holloway, and
S. Hailes, “Fleas, caterpillars and cockroaches: A summer school in
bio-inspired robotics,” in 2017 IEEE Global Engineering Education
Conference (EDUCON), 04 2017, pp. 856–861.
[77] F. Shaw, K. Wendell, G. Puttick, D. Bernstein, and E. Danahy,
“Problem scoping in designing biomimetic robots,” in Rethinking
Learning in the Digital Age: Making the Learning Sciences Count,
13th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2018,
Volume 3, J. Kay and R. Luckin, Eds. London, UK: International
Society of the Learning Sciences, 2018.
[78] M. F. Silva, B. Malheiro, P. Guedes, P. Ferreira, C. Ribeiro,
F. Ferreira, and A. J. Duarte, “Development of biomimetic robots
in the eps engineering programme capstone project,” in Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Technological Ecosystems
for Enhancing Multiculturality , ser. TEEM ’15. ACM, Oct. 2015.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2808580.2808614
[79] D. Cuperman and I. Verner, “Fostering analogical reasoning and design
skills through creating bio-inspired robotic models,” Procedia CIRP ,
vol. 36, pp. 285–290, 2015.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17
[80] J. Laut, T. Bartolini, and M. Porfiri, “Bioinspiring an interest in stem,”
IEEE Transactions on Education , vol. 58, no. 1, p. 48–55, Feb. 2015.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TE.2014.2324533
[81] F. Nagata, A. Otsuka, K. Sakakibara, K. Watanabe, and M. Habib, “Ex-
periment systems using three types of motors for biomimetic machine
research,” pp. 2711–2717, 2013, 2013 52nd Annual Conference of the
Society of Instrument and Control Engineers of Japan, SICE 2013 ;
Conference date: 14-09-2013 Through 17-09-2013.
[82] V . Kopman and M. Porfiri, “Design, modeling, and characterization
of a miniature robotic fish for research and education in biomimetics
and bioinspiration,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics ,
vol. 18, no. 2, p. 471–483, Apr. 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2012.2222431
[83] D. Cuperman and I. M. Verner, “Learning through creating robotic
models of biological systems,” International Journal of Technology
and Design Education, vol. 23, no. 4, p. 849–866, Feb. 2013. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10798-013-9235-y
[84] H. A. Bruck, A. L. Gershon, I. Golden, S. K. Gupta, L. S. Gyger,
E. B. Magrab, and B. W. Spranklin, “Training mechanical engineering
students to utilize biological inspiration during product development,”
Bioinspiration & Biomimetics, vol. 2, no. 4, p. S198–S209, Oct. 2007.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-3182/2/4/S08
[85] J. Seipel, “Mechanistic Model-Based Method for Bio-Inspired
Design and Education,” ser. ASME International Mechanical
Engineering Congress and Exposition, vol. V olume 2: Biomedical
and Biotechnology Engineering; Nanoengineering for Medicine
and Biology, 11 2011, pp. 835–841. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1115/IMECE2011-64595
[86] H. Frank, T. Frank, A. Mittnacht, and C. Sichau, “A bioinspired 2-dof
throwing robot,” in IEEE Africon ’11 . IEEE, Sep. 2011. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AFRCON.2011.6071965
[87] V . Kopman and M. Porfiri, “A Miniature and Low-Cost Robotic Fish
for Ethorobotics Research and Engineering Education: I—Bioinspired
Design,” ser. Dynamic Systems and Control Conference, vol.
ASME 2011 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference and
Bath/ASME Symposium on Fluid Power and Motion Control,
V olume 1, 10 2011, pp. 209–216. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2011-6005
[88] N. Abaid, V . Kopman, and M. Porfiri, “A Miniature and Low-
Cost Robotic Fish for Ethorobotics Research and Engineering
Education: Part II—STEM Outreach,” ser. Dynamic Systems and
Control Conference, vol. ASME 2011 Dynamic Systems and Control
Conference and Bath/ASME Symposium on Fluid Power and Motion
Control, V olume 1, 10 2011, pp. 217–224. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1115/DSCC2011-6006
[89] M. Doddo and S. Hsieh, “Board # 121 : Maker: A study of
multi-robot systems recreated for high school students,” in 2017
ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition , Columbus, Ohio, Jun. 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.18260/1-2--27711
[90] P. Herber and V . Kl ¨os, “A multi-robot search using lego mindstorms
– an embedded software design project,” in Proceedings of the
WESE’15: Workshop on Embedded and Cyber-Physical Systems
Education, ser. WESE’15. New York, NY , USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/2832920.2832922
[91] C. Nataraj, S. Reddy, M. Woods, B. Samanta, and C. Nataraj, “Swarm
robotics: A research project with high school students as active
participants,” in 2010 Annual Conference & Exposition , Louisville,
Kentucky, Jun. 2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.18260/
1-2--16649
[92] A. Vijayan, C. Nutakki, D. Kumar, K. Achuthan, B. Nair, and
S. Diwakar, “Enabling a freely accessible open source remotely
controlled robotic articulator with a neuro-inspired control algorithm,”
International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) ,
vol. 13, no. 01, pp. 61–75, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v13i01.6288
[93] R. Radhamani, N. Nizar, D. Kumar, B. Nair, K. Achuthan, and
S. Diwakar, “Low cost neuro-inspired robots for sustainable laboratory
education,” in 2016 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation for Humanitarian Applications (RAHA) . IEEE, Dec.
2016, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/RAHA.
2016.7931870
[94] M. Elshaw, D. Lewis, and S. Wermter, Incorporating Reactive
Learning Behaviour into a Mini-robot Platform . Springer London,
2004, p. 255–266. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-0-85729-412-8 19
[95] D. AU Blustein, N. AU Rosenthal, and J. AU Ayers, “Designing
and implementing nervous system simulations on lego robots,”
JoVE, no. 75, p. e50519, May 2013. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.jove.com/t/50519
[96] Q. Wu and G. Ji, “Design Optimization of IoT-Assisted Intelligent
Education Soft Robot Based upon Improved GA,” Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing , vol. 2022, pp. 1–15,
Apr. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.hindawi.com/journals/
wcmc/2022/7265308/
[97] T. Hashimoto, N. Kato, and H. Kobayashi, “Field trial of android-
type remote class support system in elementary school and effect
evaluation,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2009, pp. 1135–1140.
[98] X. Tan, D. Kim, N. Usher, D. Laboy, J. Jackson, A. Kapetanovic,
J. Rapai, B. Sabadus, and X. Zhou, “An autonomous robotic fish
for mobile sensing,” in 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2006, pp. 5424–5429.
[99] A. Jackson, N. Mentzer, and H. Jack, “Board # 135 : Maker:
Taking soft robotics from the laboratory to the classroom,” in 2017
ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition , Columbus, Ohio, June 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.18260/1-2--27741
[100] A. Jackson, N. Mentzer, J. Zhang, and R. Kramer, “Enhancing student
motivation and efficacy through soft robot design,” in 2017 ASEE
Annual Conference & Exposition , Columbus, Ohio, Jun. 2017.
[101] A. Jackson, N. Mentzer, and R. Kramer-Bottiglio, “Pilot analysis of the
impacts of soft robotics design on high-school student engineering per-
ceptions,” International Journal of Technology and Design Education ,
vol. 29, pp. 1083–1104, 11 2019.
[102] A. N. Sardesai, X. M. Segel, M. N. Baumholtz, Y . Chen, R. Sun,
B. W. Schork, R. Buonocore, K. O. Wagner, and H. M. Golecki,
“Design and characterization of edible soft robotic candy actuators,”
MRS Advances , vol. 3, no. 50, p. 3003–3009, Aug. 2018. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1557/adv.2018.557
[103] J. Zhang, A. Jackson, N. Mentzer, and R. Kramer, “A modular,
reconfigurable mold for a soft robotic gripper design activity,”
Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 4, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frobt.2017.00046
[104] D. P. Holland, E. J. Park, P. Polygerinos, G. J. Bennett, and C. J.
Walsh, “The soft robotics toolkit: Shared resources for research and
design,” Soft Robotics, vol. 1, no. 3, p. 224–230, Sep. 2014. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/soro.2014.0010
[105] A. Argiolas, B. C. Mac Murray, I. Van Meerbeek, J. Whitehead,
E. Sinibaldi, B. Mazzolai, and R. F. Shepherd, “Sculpting soft
machines,” Soft Robotics , vol. 3, no. 3, p. 101–108, Sep. 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/soro.2016.0004
[106] D. Holland, E. J. Park, G. J. Bennett, and C. J. Walsh, “The develop-
ment and testing of the soft robotics toolkit: An educational resource
for mechanical engineering design,” in 6th Research in Engineering
Education Symposium: Translating Research into Practice, REES 2015,
Dublin, Ireland, July 2015.
[107] M. A. Horvath, L. Hu, T. Mueller, J. Hochstein, L. Rosalia, K. A.
Hibbert, C. C. Hardin, and E. T. Roche, “An organosynthetic soft
robotic respiratory simulator,” APL Bioengineering, vol. 4, no. 2, Jun.
2020. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.5140760
[108] E. Miele, “Using the Draw-a-Scientist Test for Inquiry and Evaluation,”
Journal of College Science Teaching , vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 36–40, Mar.
2014, publisher: National Science Teachers Association ERIC Number:
EJ1041412.
[109] K. Nordstrom and P. Korpelainen, “Creativity and inspiration for
problem solving in engineering education,” Teaching in Higher
Education, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 439–450, 2011. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2011.560379
[110] D. P. Holland, S. Berndt, M. Herman, and C. J. Walsh, “Growing the
soft robotics community through knowledge-sharing initiatives,” Soft
Robotics, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 119–121, Apr. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2018.29013.dph
[111] K.-Y . Chin, Z.-W. Hong, and Y .-L. Chen, “Impact of using an
educational robot-based learning system on students’ motivation in
elementary education,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies ,
vol. 7, no. 4, p. 333–345, Oct. 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2014.2346756
[112] F. M. Campos, “Ardosia: Simulating circuits and robotic systems
in a single learning platform,” IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, vol. 16, no. 2, p. 166–177, Apr. 2023. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2023.3243688
[113] W. Giernacki, M. Skwierczynski, W. Witwicki, P. Wronski, and
P. Kozierski, “Crazyflie 2.0 quadrotor as a platform for research
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 18
and education in robotics and control engineering,” in 2017 22nd
International Conference on Methods and Models in Automation and
Robotics (MMAR). IEEE, Aug. 2017, pp. 37–42. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MMAR.2017.8046794
[114] M. Kandlhofer, G. Steinbauer, J. P. Lasnig, W. Baumann, S. Plomer,
A. Ballagi, and I. Alfoldi, “Enabling the creation of intelligent things:
Bringing artificial intelligence and robotics to schools,” in 2019 IEEE
Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) . IEEE, Oct. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FIE43999.2019.9028537
[115] S. Jung, “Experiences in developing an experimental robotics
course program for undergraduate education,” IEEE Transactions on
Education, vol. 56, no. 1, p. 129–136, Feb. 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TE.2012.2213601
[116] S. Zabihollah, S. A. Moezi, and R. Sedaghati, “Design optimization
of a miniaturized pneumatic artificial muscle and experimental
validation,” Actuators, vol. 12, no. 6, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-0825/12/6/221
[117] J. A. Douglass, G. Thomson, and C.-M. Zhao, “The learning outcomes
race: the value of self-reported gains in large research universities,”
Higher Education , vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 317–335, Sep 2012. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-011-9496-x
[118] J. Caspersen, J.-C. Smeby, and P. Olaf Aamodt, “Measuring learning
outcomes,” European Journal of Education , vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 20–30,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1111/ejed.12205
[119] E. A. Martinez-R ´ıos, P. Ponce-Cruz, and A. Molina, “A holistic
educational platform for the study of the smart grid,” International
Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM) , vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 841–861, Sep 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s12008-022-00970-6
[120] S. Orlando, E. Gaudioso, and F. de la Paz, “Toward embedding
robotics in learning environments with support to teachers: The idee
experience,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies , vol. 17,
p. 874–884, 2024. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TLT.
2023.3339882
[121] Z. Gong, Z. Xie, X. Yang, T. Wang, and L. Wen, “Design, fabrication
and kinematic modeling of a 3d-motion soft robotic arm,” in2016 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2016,
pp. 509–514.
Israel Ulises Cayetano-Jim ´enez was born in Mex-
ico City in 1992. He received the B.Sc. degree
in Mechatronics Engineering from Tecnol ´ogico de
Monterrey in 2014, and attained his M.Sc. degree
in Microengineering, specializing in Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, from the ´Ecole Polytechnique
F´ed´erale de Lausanne, Switzerland, in 2017. Since
2021, he has been a Research Assistant at the School
of Engineering and Science, Tecnol´ogico de Monter-
rey. His research interests include interdisciplinary
education, bioinspired robotics, and haptic systems.
Erick Axel Martinez-R ´ıos was born in Mexico
City, Mexico, in May 1995. He received the B.S.
degree (Hons.) in mechatronics engineering and the
M.S. degree (Hons.) in engineering science from the
Instituto Tecnol ´ogico y de Estudios Superiores de
Monterrey, Mexico City, in 2017 and 2022, respec-
tively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
engineering science with the Instituto Tecnol ´ogico
y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey. From 2018
to 2020, he worked as a Project Specialist with
the Instituto Tecnol ´ogico y de Estudios Superiores
de Monterrey. During this stay, he worked on research and development
projects in robotics. He is the author of seven journal articles, two conference
papers, and one book chapter. His research interests include signal processing,
machine learning, and control theory
Rogelio Bustamante-Bello was born in Orizaba,
Veracruz in 1965. He received the B.S. degree in
electronic instrumentation from Universidad Ver-
acruzana, Xalapa, Ver.; his M.S. degree in elec-
tronics and telecommunications from CICESE, En-
senada, Baja California, Mexico, and his Ph.D.
in telecommunications and electronics from SEPI,
Instituto Polit ´ecnico Nacional. His research inter-
ests include wireless networks, biomedical wearable
devices, research on emotional states and human
computer interfaces with therapeutic applications.
Ricardo A. Ram ´ırez-Mendoza received the Ph.D.
degree from INPG, France, in 1997. He has worked
as the Expert Consulting for different industries and
he is certified reviewer for regional development
projects. He is currently a Professor of mechatronics-
mechanics and the Dean of Research with the School
of Engineering and Science, Tecnologico de Mon-
terrey. He is the (co)author of three books, more
than 150 articles in top journals and more than 200
international conference papers and more than 1000
citations. His main research interests include the
applications of advanced control in automotive systems.
Mar´ıa Soledad Ram ´ırez-Montoya is a research
professor at the Institute for the Future of Education
of the Tecnologico de Monterrey. She focuses her
activities on the dynamisation of initiatives for ed-
ucation, with innovation, research and global sense,
as a means of social transformation and impact for
lifelong learning and sustainable development. She
coordinates the Interdisciplinary Research Group
Scaling Reasoning for Complexity for All of the
Institute for the Future of Education, with the im-
plementation of training systems supported by Open
Science and Technology 4.0 strategies, linked to projects that apply the
quadruple helix (university-industry-government-civil sector) and solutions
for sustainable development. As Coordinator of the UNESCO Chair: “Open
Education Movement for Latin America”, she mobilises training, production
and research initiatives for open education. As Coordinator of the International
Council for Open of Distance Education (ICDE) “OER Latin America”,
she promotes activities with research teams to enrich access practices in
distance education. As a member of the Open Education Global Council,
she promotes training and research activities in open science. In academic
activities Dr. Ram ´ırez-Montoya trains talent for education with emphasis on
innovation, educational entrepreneurship and multidisciplinary research; she
leads interdisciplinary research groups establishing rich experiences for the
generation of knowledge, inspired by teamwork, social responsibility and
collaborative work with national and international networks
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and 
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TLT.2024.3372894
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/