2120 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MARCH 2024
Peristaltic Pump-Based Palm-Sized Multi-Mode
Pressure Supply System for Soft Robots
Chengquan Hu , Jingyi Kang , Jiayuan Liu ,J i eW a n g , Graduate Student Member , IEEE,
and Hongen Liao , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Soft robots have garnered considerable interest in
recent years in terms of structure and functionality, while com-
mercially viable pressure supply systems with various pressure
supply modes for soft robots remain slow to progress. Hence, in this
work, a palm-sized multi-mode pressure supply system based on a
peristaltic pump is proposed for the ﬁrst time, and precise pneu-
matic pressure control is achieved with a model reference adaptive
control (MRAC) method based on the system dynamics. Further
performance evaluation demonstrates that our system can deliver
precise positive (mean error< 0.48 kPa for 0∼50 kPa) and negative
pressures (mean error < 0.85 kPa for −50∼0 kPa) with minimal
ﬂuctuations, which outperforms the PID method. Application ex-
periments indicate that our system can accommodate various pres-
sure supply requirements, including controllable pressurization
and depressurization, and has the potential for both pneumatic and
hydraulic applications. In addition, by incorporating the MRAC
method into the system, we have achieved excellent stability and
high repeatability in controlling the position of a retractable soft
pneumatic actuator, thus demonstrating the system’s high accuracy
and repeatability in pressure output. The phantom experiment
of the injection soft robotic system further validates the system’s
diverse pressure supply capabilities for complex manipulations of
soft robots.
Index Terms—Soft robot, pressure supply system, multi-mode
pressure supply, precise pressure control.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE last few decades have witnessed a boom in the struc-
tures and functions of soft robots [1], the majority of
which are based on pneumatic [2] or hydraulic actuation [3].
Precise actuation relies on a reliable and precise ﬂuid pressure
Manuscript received 17 September 2023; accepted 6 January 2024. Date of
publication 18 January 2024; date of current version 24 January 2024. This letter
was recommended for publication by Associate Editor H. Stuart and Editor Y .-L.
Park upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant 2022YFC2405200, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grants 82027807 and U22A2051, in part by Beijing Municipal
Natural Science Foundation under Grant 7212202, in part by the Institute for
Intelligent Healthcare, Tsinghua University under Grant 2022ZLB001, and in
part by Tsinghua-Foshan Innovation Special Fund under Grant 2021THFS0104.
(Chengquan Hu and Jingyi Kang contributed equally to this work.) (Correspond-
ing author: Hongen Liao.)
The authors are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, School
of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: hu-cq21@
mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; kangjy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; liujiayuan22@mails.
tsinghua.edu.cn; wangjie21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; liao@tsinghua.edu.cn).
This letter has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2024.3355732, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2024.3355732
supply. However, pressure supply systems have received little
attention, resulting in a lack of readily available commercial
solutions. Indeed, the need for researchers to establish pres-
sure supply systems tailored to their individual soft robots
leads to a substantial workload, impeding the progress of soft
robotics.
The existing lab solutions can be broadly categorized into
three types. The most common type involves a combination
of an air compressor, solenoid valves, and pressure sensors,
allowing for a rapid response in pressure supply [4]. Y et, such
recent work has focused only on ﬂuid path optimization of
solenoid valves and pressure sensors [5], [6], which can only
provide positive pressures with limited precision (about 1 kPa).
Although their control section is portable, the overall system is
still large and redundant due to the presence of the air compressor
and ancillary piping. Systems based on an infusion pump and
pressure sensors [7], [8], are capable of providing both hydraulic
and pneumatic pressures and achieving high-precision pressure
supply by controlling the movement of a motor or cylinder. How-
ever, the relatively slow speed of motor movement can, in turn,
limit the speed of pressure supply. Moreover, the limited stroke
of the syringe pump means that the injection volume is limited.
More recently, to realize multifunctionality and miniaturization,
pressure supply systems based on miniature pumps and solenoid
valves have also been investigated [9], [10]. Such customized
systems can usually meet different pressure supply needs of soft
robots, such as positive and negative pressures, but the pressure
control accuracy is usually poor, like± 3k P ai n[9]. Commonly
used miniature systems like SMC CRP compressors [11] or
FlowIO [12] offer both positive and negative pressures. How-
ever, they have limitations, such as lacking hydraulic pressure
provision and a cumbersome positive-negative pressure switch.
Moreover, undue emphasis on the pressure supply system ne-
glects the impact of soft actuators on pressure precision.
For precise real-time control of ﬂuid-driven soft robots, a well-
established system architecture is a fundamental requirement,
while a good control method plays a crucial role, particularly
when considering the compressibility of gases and the highly
nonlinear mechanical response of soft materials. According
to [13], the control of ﬂuid-driven soft robots involves low-level
control, which maps from the actuation space (system control
parameters) to the robot’s joint space (chamber pressures), and
high-level control, which maps from the robot’s joint space to
the task space (tip postures).
2377-3766 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HU et al.: PERISTALTIC PUMP-BASED PALM-SIZED MULTI-MODE PRESSURE SUPPL Y SYSTEM FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2121
Most of the existing work is directed toward high-level
control of soft robots, with model-based controllers being the
most common, like adaptive controllers [14], incompressible
Neo-Hookean model [15]. However, they neglect the inﬂuence
of the pneumatic system, often resulting in poor control ac-
curacy. Data-driven control methods are well suited to avoid
the difﬁculty in accurately modeling soft robot kinematics and
effective for continuum manipulators [16] and soft robots [17].
Nevertheless, these methods based on machine learning or
neural networks are often not robust, and disturbances in the
pressure supply system can signiﬁcantly impact the network
parameters. Therefore, to achieve accurate and stable pressure
delivery, experimentally-tuned controllers for the low-level con-
trol of pneumatic systems have been proposed like PID [18]
and bang-bang controllers [19]. Typically, the parameters of
these controllers must be ﬁne-tuned based on experimentation to
achieve optimal system performance. However, the complexity
of pneumatic systems can make parameter adjustments more
challenging.
Hence, simplifying pressure supply systems while maintain-
ing high-precision pressure output based on suitable control
strategies to meet various pressure supply needs remains a
signiﬁcant challenge. In practice, the simpler the pressure supply
system, the simpler the control strategy tends to be. Following
this principle, peristaltic pumps, as one of the few micro-pump
options that do not require additional valves for pressurization
and depressurization, have the potential to simplify the design
of pressure supply systems. Peristaltic pumps have been proven
to provide high precision in delivering hydraulic pressure to
soft robots [20]. Nevertheless, pneumatic systems based on
peristaltic pumps are rarely reported, let alone precise control of
multi-mode pressure outputs.
In this work, we propose a low-power and palm-sized
pneumatic system based on a peristaltic pump, capable of
supplying multi-mode pressures. The focus is primarily
on pneumatic control of the system, as hydraulic control
of peristaltic pumps is already quite mature and relatively
simple due to the incompressibility of the liquid. Based on
the dynamic analysis of soft pneumatic actuators (SPAs) and
the pneumatic system, rapid and precise pressure supply is
realized by utilizing the model reference adaptive control
(MRAC) method. Our main contributions are summarized as
follows:
1) To the best of our knowledge, a pneumatic system based
on a peristaltic pump has been proposed for the ﬁrst time. Our
palm-sized and valve-free system has the innate ability to rapidly
draw air directly from the atmosphere, enabling the regulation
of both positive and negative pressures.
2) By analyzing the dynamics of a common SPA and
peristaltic pump, a low-level controller using the MRAC
method has been designed for diverse pressure outputs
(−54.12∼183.77 kPa) of the system with high accuracy (mean
error within 0.85 kPa for −50∼50 kPa).
3) Application experiments have demonstrated that our sys-
tem can provide both pneumatic and hydraulic pressures, and
the precision of pressure control is adequate for rapid and
Fig. 1. Prototype of our pressure supply system. (a) Exterior view of the palm-
sized system. (b) System components connection schematic.
stable position control of soft actuators, including more intricate
combined motions.
II. S YSTEM AND CONTROL STRA TEGY
A. System Overview
In Fig. 1(a), the prototype of the pressure supply system
consists of a peristaltic pump (S300-2B+JZ15B; Ditron Technol-
ogy Co., Ltd., China), a waterproof pressure sensor (MIKROE
Pressure 14 Click), and a micro-controller (ESP32-WROOM-
32D). Detailed components’ interconnections are depicted in
Fig. 1(b). The micro-controller receives instructions from the
computer, modulating the pump’s speed through 0∼5 V analog
voltage. In parallel, it employs MOSFET switches to achieve
the pump’s start-stop and forward-reverse rotation functions. As
peristaltic pumps work on the principle that stepper motor-driven
rollers alternately squeeze and release the elastic hose to gen-
erate negative pressure to transfer ﬂuid, our system inherently
possesses the capability to provide positive and negative pressure
for pneumatic or hydraulic applications, without bulky air reser-
voirs, additional electromagnetic valves or specialized piping.
Furthermore, when the peristaltic pump stops running, the roller
squeezes and plugs the elastic hose, effectively locking and hold-
ing the pressure. Thus, the small size (121 × 91 × 85.5 mm3),
simple structure (fewer than 4 main components) and afford-
ability (<150 $), along with its various pressure supply modes,
make our system a promising option for industrial or medical
applications.
B. Dynamic Analysis
Precise pressure delivery by adjusting the pump speed relies
on precise modeling of system dynamics, especially factors re-
lated to soft pneumatic actuators. Thanks to the simple structure,
system dynamic analysis simpliﬁes into three parts: the actuator
chamber, connecting tubes, and peristaltic pump.
Based on the ideal gas law, the absolute pressure P , the air
temperature T , and the volume V of a typical SPA actuation
chamber satisfy:
PV = mRaT (1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2122 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MARCH 2024
where Ra is the gas constant for air and m is air mass in the
chamber. The derivative of P with respect to time t yields:
dP
dt = −P
V
dV
dt + RaT
V ˙m + P
T
dT
dt (2)
According to the polytropic law T = T0(P/P0)(κ−1)/κ[21],i n
which κis the polytropic index, P0 is atmosphere pressure and
T0 is the room temperature, (2) simpliﬁes to
dP
dt = −κP
V
dV
dt +κRaT
V ˙m (3)
We boldly assume a different pattern of chamber volume change
under positive and negative pressure, as follows:
V =
{
V0 +kpP 3, ifP>P 0 −δ
[V0 +kp(P0−δ)3 ]
√
δ√P0−P , otherwise.
(4)
where V0 is the initial chamber volume, and kp is the constant
coefﬁcient. δis a small positive value close to zero, used to
avoid an inﬁnite V when P = P0. Substituting (4) into (3),t h e
dynamics of the actuator can be written as
dP
dt = f (P )˙mRaT (5)
where
f (P )=
⎧
⎨
⎩
κ
V0 +(3κ+1)kpP 3 , ifP>P 0 −δ
2κ
√
(P0−P )3
[V0+kp(P0−δ)3 ]
√
δ[2P0−(2−κ)P ], otherwise.
(6)
The peristaltic pump introduces airﬂow into the SPA chamber
through piping, with main effects including ﬂow rate reduction
due to pressure drop and response time delay. The mass ﬂow rate
˙m(t) at the outlet of the tube, i.e. the change in air mass in the
chamber, can be derived by solving the mass ﬂow differential
equation proposed by Richer [22],
˙m(t)= ˙min(t−Lt/c)e−(Rt/2ρ)t (7)
where ˙min is the mass ﬂow rate at tube inlet, Lt is tube length,
ρis the air density, c is the sound speed, and Rt is the tube
resistance. Time of airﬂow through the tubeLt/c can be ignored
given the short tube length (about 0.2∼0.4 m), and (7) simpliﬁes
to
˙m =˙mine−RtRaT0/2PL t/c (8)
The tube inlet ﬂow rate ˙min is generated by the peristaltic pump,
which can be expressed by motor speed n:
˙min = ρπr2L0n (9)
where r is the hose inner radius, and L0 is the hose length
occluded by the roller [23].
Thus, by combining (5), (8), and (9), we establish the system
dynamic control model from the motor speed n to the pressure
P in the SPA chamber.
C. Control Strategy
In practice, certain system constants are difﬁcult to obtain
accurately, such as the tube lengthLt. Moreover, an assumption
in (4) that is not exactly accurate and a negligible tube time delay
Fig. 2. Diagram of the MRAC method.
may also result in a model that is not fully compatible with the
actual system. Therefore, the model reference adaptive control
method [24] is adopted, which can dynamically adjust controller
parameters or structure in real-time to adapt to system changes
or external disturbances.
In Fig. 2, the reference model consists of a virtual P controller
and the previously derived system dynamic model:
{nm = A(Pr −Pm)
dPm
dt = f (Pm)RaTρπr2L0nme−RtRT/ 2Pm Lt/c (10)
whereA is the proportional gain,nm (virtual motor speed) is the
input of the system dynamic model, and Pr is the goal pressure.
The motor speed n can be represented by:
n = kxP +krPr (11)
where kx and kr are the controller’s adjustable control gains.
To keep the real system’s outputs in line with the reference
model, the difference between the SPA chamber pressure P
obtained from the pressure sensor and the reference model’s
output pressurePm, denoted ase, is employed to modifykx and
kr . Here, we use the MIT rule [25] as the adaptation law, which
can be expressed as:
{∂kx
∂t = −γxeP
∂kr
∂t = −γrePr
(12)
whereγx andγr are adaptation rates.
III. S YSTEM PERFORMANCE
To validate our control method and assess the system’s per-
formance, we have conducted some pressure characteristic tests.
In Fig. 3(a), the linear motion platform serves a dual purpose: to
hold the syringe at 10 mL for maximum pressure measurements
when supplying air to the syringe alone and to move for pressure
disturbances when the pressure supply system connects the
syringe to the SPA via a T pipe.
Although a peristaltic pump can continuously draw air from
the atmosphere, its maximum pressure outputs are limited
by the motor speed. Thus, we conducted a pre-test to measure
the pressure range our system could supply, with the motor
running at full speed to achieve extreme pressurization (in
Fig. 3(c)) or depressurization (in Fig. 3(e))o faﬁ x e dv o l u m e
of 10 mL syringe. The results show that the maximum positive
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HU et al.: PERISTALTIC PUMP-BASED PALM-SIZED MULTI-MODE PRESSURE SUPPL Y SYSTEM FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2123
Fig. 3. Maximum pressure measurements. (a) The connection schematic. (b) The experimental setup. (c) and (d) are the maximum positive pressure curve and
the corresponding real-time ﬂow, respectively. (e) and (f) are the maximum negative pressure curve and the corresponding real-time ﬂow, respective ly.
Fig. 4. System response for various pneumatic pressure supplies with our method and PID method. (a) Soft pneumatic actuator bending at different posi tive
pressures. (b) Soft silicone gripper at different negative pressures. (c) Positive pressure incremental change curves. (d) Negative pressure incremental change curves.
(e) Positive pressure step change curves. (f) Negative pressure step change curves.
and negative pressure outputs of the system are about 183.77 kPa
and −54.12 kPa, respectively, while Fig. 3(d) and 3(f) are the
real-time ﬂows. The real-time ﬂow at negative pressure is much
smaller than at positive pressure because there is very little air
left in the syringe during vacuuming.
Then we conducted formal experiments within the pressure
output range of the system to ensure proper operation. We used
a typical three-chamber SPA made of Ecoﬂex-0050 silicone
for positive pressure testing and a 4-ﬁnger silicone soft gripper
(L Y -Z4D15 L; Ling Y ang Precision Co., Ltd., China) for nega-
tive pressure testing. Expansion and contraction of air chambers
generally would present a higher challenge to the system. In each
experiment, our control method was compared to the traditional
PID method. The SPA bending with one chamber ﬁlled with
positive pressure is depicted in Fig. 4(a), while Fig. 4(b) shows
the bending of the ﬁngers of the soft gripper when negative
pressure is applied.
A. Pressure Increment Change Response
We conducted pressure increment change tests ﬁrst to evaluate
the precision and stability of the pneumatic pressure supply
of the system to the common SPA and soft gripper. Pressure
increment change here means that the pressure increases or
decreases in steps of 10 kPa with a ﬁxed time interval of 5.1 s.
The goal pressure stepped up from 0 kPa to 50 kPa and then
stepped down to 0 kPa for each positive pressure increment
change trial (10 repetitions), while the goal pressure stepped
down from 0 kPa to -50 kPa and then stepped up to 0 kPa for
each negative pressure increment change trial (10 repetitions).
We also recorded the power consumption of the system, which
was 10.55 W, 4.28 W, and 10.55 W for the pressurization,
holding, and depressurization phases, respectively, even lower
than that of a common bedroom LED energy-saving light. It’s
noteworthy that we tried our best to manually adjust the control
parameters of the PID and MRAC methods to optimize the per-
formance of positive pressure increment changes, and no further
modiﬁcations were made in all subsequent experiments. The
ﬁndings in Fig. 4(c) demonstrate that the real pressure closely
follows the goal pressure in cases of positive pressure increment
changes for both methods. However, the system response to
negative pressure increment changes is less favorable, partic-
ularly when employing the PID control method, as depicted in
Fig. 4(d).
Furthermore, we employ the step response performance met-
rics to quantitatively assess the system’s pressure response per-
formance in Fig. 5. For each stage of real pressure variation, we
treat it as a step response, such as the change from 20 kPa to
30 kPa. The settling time is deﬁned as the duration required for
the system to reach and remain within 2% of the steady state.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2124 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MARCH 2024
Fig. 5. Step response performance metrics for evaluating our and PID Methods. (a)–(c) depict the steady state error, settling time, and overshoot-un dershoot for
the two methods in the case of incremental pressure change, while (d)–(f) illustrate the same metrics in the case of step pressure change.
The percent overshoot or undershoot is the ratio of the maximum
or minimum value before settling time to the steady-state mean.
The steady-state error is calculated as the difference between the
goal pressure and average real pressure.
In the majority of cases, whether supplying positive or nega-
tive pressure, whether involving pressure increases or decreases,
our method consistently attains a faster convergence to a stable
state with smaller error compared to the PID method in Fig.5(b).
In addition, it can be noted that as the goal pressure increases
(whether positive or negative), the error at the steady state
tends to be larger, and the settling time tends to be longer.
This phenomenon may be attributed to the pulsatile nature of
peristaltic pumps in ﬂuid delivery, with air oscillations becoming
more frequent at higher pressures. Although our method exhibits
a higher overshoot compared to the PID method in Fig. 5(c),
it demonstrates better stability with reduced ﬂuctuations in 10
repetitions. In summary, our palm-sized, low-power pressure
supply system, devoid of valves and reservoirs, rapidly achieves
the goal pressure (0.51 ∼4.73 s) with remarkable precision in
both positive (mean error within 0.47 kPa) and negative pressure
(mean error within 0.83 kPa) outputs, courtesy of our MRAC
method.
B. Pressure Step Change Response
Pressure step changes involve larger amplitude variations, and
place higher demands on the real-time response of the system
outputs. In Fig. 4(e) and 4(f), during each of the 10 repetitions,
the system was commanded to maintain positive pressures at 0,
20, 0, 40, 0, 60, 0, 80, and 0 kPa, and negative pressures at 0,−10,
0, −20, 0, −30, 0, −40, and 0 kPa, respectively. The duration
for each goal pressure condition remained at 5.1 seconds.
The results indicate that real pressures with the PID method
don’t closely follow goal pressures. The errors and ﬂuctuations
are substantial to the extent that meaningful discussion is not
feasible. In contrast, with our method, real pressures consistently
reach goal pressures within 5.1 seconds and remain stable,
whether supplying positive or negative pressure. The magni-
tude of the pressure change reaches a maximum of 80 kPa for
positive pressure and 40 kPa for negative pressure. Thus, the
pressure ﬂuctuations in the case of pressure step changes are
more pronounced in comparison to pressure increment changes.
However, from the trend, it’s evident that if the duration for
each goal pressure condition is extended, the system’s output
(real pressure) is likely to stabilize at the target pressure with
even smaller errors.
We use the same performance metrics for the pressure step
changes. In Fig. 5(d) and 5(e), settling times and steady-state
errors likewise increase with higher goal pressures, whether
positive or negative. At the same goal pressure (e.g., 20 kPa),
the steady-state errors in the case of pressure step changes tend
to be slightly larger than those in pressure increment changes,
and the settling time is signiﬁcantly extended due to greater air
mass changes. However, in all cases with our method, outputs
in pressure step change tests can still reach a steady state within
5.1 s at the expense of some steady state accuracy. Interest-
ingly, from higher pressures (e.g., 80 kPa) back to 0 kPa, the
settling is fast, and steady-state errors remain small. Moreover,
the overshoots and undershoots in the case of pressure step
changes are smaller than those of pressure increment changes,
which indicates that there is potential for improvement in our
method through parameter optimization to adapt to different
pressure variations. In conclusion, our method is signiﬁcantly
better than the PID method in all cases, more adaptable to
diverse pressure supply scenarios without excessive parameter
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HU et al.: PERISTALTIC PUMP-BASED PALM-SIZED MULTI-MODE PRESSURE SUPPL Y SYSTEM FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2125
Fig. 6. Real pressure curves of the system under disturbances. (a) Keeping
pressure at 50 kPa with our method. (b) Keeping pressure at 50 kPa with the
PID method. (c) Keeping pressure at −30 kPa with our method. (d) Keeping
pressure at −30 kPa with the PID method.
tuning. Furthermore, our method enables the system to provide
pressures ranging from−50 to 80 kPa with a settling time of less
than 5.1 seconds and a steady-state error of less than 2.6% (error
as a percentage of goal pressure). This capability is adequate to
meet the common actuation needs of regular SPAs.
C. Pressure Stabilization Test Under Disturbances
Continuous and stable pressure supply is imperative in robotic
applications. A pressure supply system must be capable of
maintaining stable pressures, and even withstanding pressure
disturbances caused by external factors. This experiment aims to
assess the system’s ability to maintain pressure through closed-
loop feedback control.
Initially, the system pressure output stabilized around the
goal pressure. The linear motor platform in Fig. 3(b) was
subsequently advanced by 25 mm in 1050 ms to push the
10 mL syringe, resulting in pressurized disturbances within the
three-chamber SPA or soft gripper. Due to closed-loop feedback
control of system outputs, real pressure returned to the goal
pressure after a short time. When real pressure stabilized near
goal pressure, the linear motor platform moved 25 mm back in
1050 ms, resulting in depressurization disturbances. Eventually,
real pressure would stabilize again.
In Fig. 6, goal pressures are set to 50 kPa and −30 kPa,
respectively, while our method is compared to the PID method.
The process is divided into 7 states, as indicated by the magenta
dots in each subﬁgure: the initial steady state, pressurization
disturbance state, pressurization adjustment state, pressurization
steady stage, depressurization disturbance state, depressuriza-
tion adjustment state, and depressurization steady state. In the
case of maintaining 50 kPa with the PID method, real pressure
fails to recover stability after a depressurization disturbance.
Therefore, there are only 5 magenta dots in Fig. 6(b).T h e
detailed stability performance is presented in Table I. The pri-
mary reason for the disparity in peak pressures between the
two methods is that the closed-loop feedback control of system
outputs remains active when the disturbance is introduced. The
results indicate that our method performs better in terms of
steady-state error, except in the case of the pressurization steady
TABLE I
STABILIZA TIONPERFORMANCE UNDER PRESSURE DISTURBANCES
stage at −30 kPa. Despite this, it should be noted that steady
state error calculations are based on the fact that the settling
times of the PID method are almost 1.6 ∼6.3 times higher than
that of our method in all cases. In summary, with our method, the
system can rapidly return to a stable state and maintain pressure
stability with a small error (within 0.68 kPa) even in the presence
of external disturbances.
IV . APPLICA TIONS
As a palm-sized pressure supply system with integrated pos-
itive and negative pressure supply, controllable pressurization
and depressurization, it can be used in numerous industrial
and medical applications. To validate the versatility and prac-
ticability of our system, we conducted a series of application
experiments.
A. Pneumatic Applications
Gripping is a common industrial assembly line operation
that utilizes grippers to hold objects. We employed two distinct
pneumatic grippers driven by our system to grasp objects. The
gripper in Fig. 7(a) operates by using positive pressure to actuate
a cylinder for opening and closing, whereas the gripper in
Fig. 7(b) relies on a negative pressure jamming mechanism
for grasping and releasing objects. It’s clearly shown in the
supplementary video both grippers can effectively grip, lift,
and release objects of different shapes, which demonstrates the
ability of our systems to deliver positive and negative pneumatic
pressures and sufﬁcient ﬂow.
B. Hydraulic Applications
Peristaltic pumps are commonly used for precise liquid deliv-
ery like infusion and surgical ﬂushing for their controlled ﬂow
rate regulation. Thus, we conducted a cardiac blood circulation
phantom experiment in Fig. 7(c) and the supplementary video.
Our system acts as a power element, supplying positive or
negative pressure to the cardiac phantom to simulate the process
of pumping blood out or back into the heart. The results show that
our system’s ﬂuid circuits are watertight, reliable, and suited for
hydraulic applications. Thus, further optimization of hydraulic
pressure control will expand the potential applications of our
system.
C. Precise Position Control for Retractable SPA
To further showcase the pneumatic pressure supply precision
of our system, we specially designed a retractable SPA for a
position control test. The retractable SPA, made of Dragon skin
20 silicone, presented a bellow shape that could respond to both
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2126 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MARCH 2024
Fig. 7. Application experiments. (a) and (b) depict the supply of positive and negative pressure, respectively, for gripping a pen (12.82 g) and a tape (31.67 g).
(c) Supplying positive and negative hydraulic pressures for simulating heart pumping. (d) Setup for a retractable SPA position control. (e) Increme ntal change of
retractable SPA tip position curve (red line) and chamber pressures (blue line). (f) Repeatability curve of the retractable SPA tip position under cy clic chamber
pressures. (g) Schematic of the injection soft robotic system. (h) Setup for a phantom experiment. (i) Liver medication injection process.
positive and negative pressures by elongating and contracting
in Fig. 7(d). An optical tracking system (OptiTrack V120: Trio)
was used to track the position of the optical marker, which was
ﬁxed to the tip of the SPA.
Fig. 7(e) shows the variation of the SPA tip Z-axis coordinate
as the pressure changes from negative to positive and back
again. It’s clear that the tip Z-axis coordinate is essentially
unchanged in each pressure steady state, e.g. −4.24± 0.02 mm
at−10 kPa and 6.19 ± 0.02 mm at 15 kPa, fully demonstrating
the ability of our system to supply a stable pressure. Moreover,
the relationship between the tip Z-coordinate and the chamber
pressure at stabilization is approximately linear.
In Fig. 7(f), the SPA exhibits good repeatability in its Z-axis
coordinate changes. The mean values of the peak and trough
Z-axis coordinates of the SPA tip for the 20 cycles are 3.19
± 0.004 mm and −3.22 ± 0.63 mm at maximum positive and
negative pressures, respectively, exhibiting excellent position re-
peatability. Despite a 30.3 ms delay between the two curves, our
system can meet the demand for rapid and repeatable actuation
of soft robots as shown in the supplementary video.
D. Abdominal Liver Injection Phantom Experiment
To fully utilize the multi-mode pressure supply capability,
we designed an injection soft robotic system for an abdominal
liver injection phantom experiment, in which the injection soft
robot comprised a bendable SPA in Fig. 4(a), a retractable SPA
in Fig. 7(d), and a needle. Fig. 7(g) shows the injection soft
robot could achieve bending, extension, and liquid injection
respectively by selectively opening valve 1, 2, or 3. In Fig. 7(h),
we placed an ex vivo porcine liver in the abdominal phantom,
secured the injection soft robot on a UR5 robotic arm, and used
blue ink to simulate liquid medication.
Fig. 7(i) and the supplementary video demonstrate the entire
injection procedure clearly from Steps I to VIII. Initially, the
retractable SPA was contracted (negative air pressure, only valve
2 open). When the bendable SPA bent to align with the target
(positive air pressure, only valve 1 open), the retractable SPA
changed to an extended state (positive air pressure, only valve 2
open), driving the needle to pierce the liver and inject liquid
medication (positive hydraulic pressure, only valve 3 open).
The retraction process was reversed. The phantom experiment
vividly demonstrates how our system’s multi-mode pressure
supply can be utilized for a soft robot with combined motion
capabilities to perform intricate operations.
V. D ISCUSSION
Despite the excellent performance of our system with the
MRAC method, there are still some limitations. Compared to
traditional air compressor and valve combinations, our system
has limited maximum pressure output and longer delays due to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HU et al.: PERISTALTIC PUMP-BASED PALM-SIZED MULTI-MODE PRESSURE SUPPL Y SYSTEM FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2127
the limited peristaltic pump speed and the lack of a reservoir.
However, the current pressure supply range ( −54∼184 kPa)
of the system is suitable for various applications, particularly
for soft robots [3]. In addition, precise and rapid delivery of
higher pressures can be achieved through further reﬁnement
of the pneumatic chamber volume change model in (4) and
global optimization of control parameters in (11). Optimizing
control parameters or adding a pulse damper can also enhance
the peristaltic pump’s smooth pulse delivery under high pressure,
reducing air oscillations.
To enhance the commercial viability of the system, certain
improvements are necessary. Firstly, optimizing the structure
and selecting lightweight miniature components, like micro
peristaltic pumps, can reduce the current substantial size and
costs. Secondly, with the inclusion of hydraulic supply control
algorithms, we can further expand the system’s applicability.
Finally, the multi-channel pressure supply capability of the
system can be greatly enhanced by paralleling peristaltic pumps
or adding auxiliary solenoid valves.
VI. C ONCLUSION
To our knowledge, a pneumatic pressure supply based on a
peristaltic pump has been proposed for the ﬁrst time. Without
the need for bulky gas reservoirs, we use the MRAC method
based on system dynamics to achieve precise pressure control
for soft robots. We have conducted a series of experiments to
verify the superiority of our method over the traditional PID
method. V arious applications, including positive and negative
pneumatic pressure, hydraulic pressure, precise position control
of a retractable SPA, and phantom experiment of an injection
soft robotic system, demonstrate the practicality and versatility
of our system. In short, our palm-sized system meets precise
pressure supply needs for soft robots across various scenarios,
potentially demonstrating more versatile than FlowIO [12] due
to hydraulic supply capabilities.
Future work will be centered on optimizing methods that are
applicable for precise control across the entire pressure range
and further integrating the system for miniaturization.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Rus and M. T. Tolley, “Design, fabrication and control of soft robots,”
Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 467–475, 2015.
[2] K. Wang et al., “A fast soft robotic laser sweeping system using data-driven
modeling approach,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 3043–3058,
Aug. 2023.
[3] B. Zhang, C. Hu, P . Y ang, Z. Liao, and H. Liao, “Design and modularization
of multi-DoF soft robotic actuators,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. ,v o l .4 ,
no. 3, pp. 2645–2652, Jul. 2019.
[4] M. S. Xavier, A. J. Fleming, and Y . K. Y ong, “Design and control of
pneumatic systems for soft robotics: A simulation approach,”IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5800–5807, Jul. 2021.
[5] B. J. Caasenbrood, F. E. V an Beek, H. K. Chu, and I. A. Kuling,
“A desktop-sized platform for real-time control applications of pneu-
matic soft robots,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Soft Robot ., 2022,
pp. 217–223.
[6] J. W. Booth, J. C. Case, E. L. White, D. S. Shah, and R. Kramer-Bottiglio,
“An addressable pneumatic regulator for distributed control of soft robots,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Soft Robot ., 2018, pp. 25–30.
[7] J. Peters, B. Anvari, C. Chen, Z. Lim, and H. A. Wurdemann, “Hybrid
ﬂuidic actuation for a foam-based soft actuator,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., 2020, pp. 8701–8708.
[8] C. Hu et al., “A miniaturized variable stiffness soft manipulator with a
customizable LMPA pattern,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 8, no. 9,
pp. 5704–5711, Sep. 2023.
[9] B. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Ma, Y . Wu, X. Zhang, and H. Liao, “Pneumatic
system capable of supplying programmable pressure states for soft robots,”
Soft Robot., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1001–1013, 2022.
[10] D. P . Holland et al., “The soft robotics toolkit: Strategies for overcoming
obstacles to the wide dissemination of soft-robotic hardware,”IEEE Robot.
Autom. Mag., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 57–64, Mar. 2017.
[11] “WEB Catalog SMC Corporation.” Accessed: Nov. 20, 2023. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.smcworld.com/webcatalog/en-jp/compact-
compressors/compact-compressors/CRPE/#detail
[12] A. Shtarbanov, “FlowiO development platform–the pneumatic “raspberry
pi” for soft robotics,” in Proc. Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. Proc .,
2021, pp. 1–6.
[13] T. George Thuruthel, Y . Ansari, E. Falotico, and C. Laschi, “Control
strategies for soft robotic manipulators: A survey,” Soft Robot. ,v o l .5 ,
no. 2, pp. 149–163, 2018.
[14] M. Azizkhani, M. Zareinejad, and M. A. Khosravi, “Model reference
adaptive control of a soft bending actuator with input constraints and
parametric uncertainties,” Mechatronics, vol. 84, 2022, Art. no. 102800.
[15] P . Polygerinos et al., “Modeling of soft ﬁber-reinforced bending actuators,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 778–789, Jun. 2015.
[16] T. George Thuruthel, E. Falotico, M. Manti, A. Pratesi, M. Cianchetti,
and C. Laschi, “Learning closed loop kinematic controllers for continuum
manipulators in unstructured environments,” Soft Robot. , vol. 4, no. 3,
pp. 285–296, 2017.
[17] M. T. Gillespie, C. M. Best, E. C. Townsend, D. Wingate, and M. D.
Killpack, “Learning nonlinear dynamic models of soft robots for model
predictive control with neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Soft
Robot., 2018, pp. 39–45.
[18] C. Branyan et al., “Soft snake robots: Mechanical design and geometric
gait implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Biomimetics , 2017,
pp. 282–289.
[19] C. D. Onal and D. Rus, “Autonomous undulatory serpentine locomotion
utilizing body dynamics of a ﬂuidic soft robot,” Bioinspir . Biomim.,v o l .8 ,
no. 2, 2013, Art. no. 026003.
[20] M. A. Bell, B. Gorissen, K. Bertoldi, J. C. Weaver, and R. J. Wood, “A
modular and self-contained ﬂuidic engine for soft actuators,” Adv. Intell.
Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 2100094.
[21] J. F. Carneiro and F. G. de Almeida, “Reduced-order thermodynamic
models for servo-pneumatic actuator chambers,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.
Part I. J. Syst. Control Eng., vol. 220, no. 4, pp. 301–314, 2006.
[22] E. Richer and Y . Hurmuzlu, “A high performance pneumatic force actu-
ator system: Part I–nonlinear mathematical model,” J. Dyn. Syst. Meas.
Control-Trans. ASME, vol. 122, no. 3, pp. 416–425, 2000.
[23] M. P . McIntyre, G. van Schoor, K. R. Uren, and C. P . Kloppers, “Modelling
the pulsatile ﬂow rate and pressure response of a roller-type peristaltic
pump,” Sens. Actuator A-Phys., vol. 325, 2021, Art. no. 112708.
[24] C.-C. Hang and P . Parks, “Comparative studies of model reference adap-
tive control systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , vol. AC-18, no. 5,
pp. 419–428, Oct. 1973.
[25] P . V . Osburn, H. P . Whitaker, and A. Kezer, “New developments in the
design of adaptive control systems,” Reston V A, USA: Inst. Aeronautical
Sci., 1961.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:17:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 