PneuDrive: An Embedded Pressure Control System and Modeling
Toolkit for Large-Scale Soft Robots
Curtis C. Johnson, Daniel G. Cheney, Dallin L. Cordon, Marc D. Killpack
Abstract— In this paper, we present a modular pressure
control system called PneuDrive that can be used for large-scale,
pneumatically-actuated soft robots. The design is particularly
suited for situations which require distributed pressure control
and high flow rates. Up to four embedded pressure control
modules can be daisy-chained together as peripherals on a
robust RS-485 bus, enabling closed-loop control of up to 16
valves with pressures ranging from 0-100 psig (0-689 kPa) over
distances of more than 10 meters. The system is configured as
a C++ ROS node by default. However, independent of ROS,
we provide a Python interface with a scripting API for added
flexibility. We demonstrate our implementation of PneuDrive
through various trajectory tracking experiments for a three-
joint, continuum soft robot with 12 different pressure inputs.
Finally, we present a modeling toolkit with implementations
of three dynamic actuation models, all suitable for real-time
simulation and control. We demonstrate the use of this toolkit
in customizing each model with real-world data and evaluating
the performance of each model. The results serve as a reference
guide for choosing between several actuation models in a
principled manner. A video summarizing our results can be
found here: https://bit.ly/3QkrEqO.
I. INTRODUCTION
Pneumatics are a common method of actuation for soft
robots. Coupled with the inherent compliance of the soft
robot structure, pneumatics can often improve safety while
the robot makes unplanned contact with the environment.
Many pneumatically actuated soft robots are small (i.e.
centimeter scale [1], [2]). As the size of soft robots increase,
many can no longer support their own weight or are only
capable of carrying small payloads. Due to their tremendous
potential for flexibility and adaptability, we aim to create
solutions that facilitate the ‘scaling up’ of soft robots (i.e.
meter scale). As pneumatically-actuated soft robots scale up
in size and payload capability, their actuators will require
higher flow rates, will exert higher forces at higher pressures,
and will more directly affect the dynamic response of the
system. Industrial pneumatic actuators and controllers that
can handle such requirements are unsuitable for soft robots
due to their size and weight. This suggests a need for a small,
lightweight, and affordable pressure control system that can
be distributed over large physical distances.
In addition, as more dynamic tasks are attempted with
large-scale soft robots, simulating the effect and transient
response of pneumatic actuators will play a more important
role. Existing high-fidelity multi-physics simulation tools are
too slow and computationally expensive to meet the demands
This material was based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 1935312 and 2024792.
All authors are with the Robotics and Dynamics Laboratory at Brigham
Young University in Provo Utah, USA.
Fig. 1. PneuDrive Controller (left) and PneuDrive Embedded (right) boards.
of real-time model-based control (MBC) or reinforcement
learning (RL). As a result, actuator dynamics have largely
been ignored in modeling and control of pneumatically-
driven soft robots [1]. However, recent efforts have begun
to incorporate them in various ways, suggesting a need for a
principled methodology to choose between various models.
As a step in addressing these needs, this paper makes two
main contributions:
• We present an open-source pressure control system
called PneuDrive, designed specifically for large-scale
(meter-length) soft robots and demonstrate its capabili-
ties in hardware. The total cost of the system is roughly
$200 USD per embedded board. Designs and software
can be found here: https://bit.ly/463MDUI.
• We provide an easy-to-use software toolkit with imple-
mentations of three different dynamic actuation models
originally derived in [3]–[6]. These models are all
suitable for real-time simulation and control, but vary in
terms of performance characteristics. We use this toolkit
to evaluate the trade-offs between each type of model,
focusing specifically on speed, accuracy, and ease of
system identification. The findings we present can serve
as a reference guide to choosing a suitable actuation
model for a particular application. This toolkit can be
found here: https://bit.ly/3s8UOkG
Our requirements driving this work are as follows:
1) Large Scale - We need the system to regulate pressures
of up to 80 psi while providing high-flow rates with
proportional flow valves.
arXiv:2504.00222v1  [cs.RO]  31 Mar 2025
2) Distributed control - We need to control at least 12
valve/chamber pairs separated by physical distances of
about one meter with minimal wiring and tubing.
3) Expandable - Ideally the system is capable of incorpo-
rating additional sensors for future work (e.g. IMUs).
4) Easy to use - The solution should use low-cost, off-
the-shelf components that are easy to replace and the
software should be open-source and easy to customize.
5) Communication - The system must easily connect to
other devices with low latency and reliable communi-
cation for real-time control loops.
6) Simulation - We need models that capture the strong
dynamic nonlinearites and coupling with pneumatics.
Since we intend on using these models for MBC and
RL they must be reasonably accurate and real-time
capable.
Next we explore current state-of-the-art pressure con-
trol solutions with respect to our design requirements and
summarize the existing work towards modeling pneumatic
actuator dynamics.
A. Related Work
The Soft Robotics Control Unit (SRC) [7] is a solution
based on a Raspberry Pi which can stack up to six pressure
control hats for controlling up to 12 pneumatic channels. The
authors provide APIs for MATLAB, Simulink, and Unity,
with TCP/IP communication possible with minimal software
modifications. The Pneumatic Box [8] is a similar solution
using a BeagleBone Black (BBB) that integrates well with
common robotics middleware (e.g ROS). PneuSoRD [9] uses
microcontroller devices like the Arduino Due instead of
single board computers (SBC) like the Raspberry Pi or BBB
and can control up to five proportional valves. Each design
fits our needs in all areas except distributed control. The
design of these platforms all require the valves and pressure
sensors to be located centrally, multiplying the amount of
tubing and wiring needed to operate all 12 valves.
The authors of [2] released an innovative design that uses
two miniature ON-OFF valves to mimic proportional valve
control. Each board is individually addressable on an I2C bus
allowing control of up to 127 pseudo-proportional valves.
While ideal for small soft robots, the miniature valve size
severely limits flow rates. Software APIs are not provided
but could be added without much difficulty. However, the
I2C protocol was not designed to be used over long physical
distances and is sensitive to electromagnetic interference.
The Wireless Compact Control Unit (WICCU) [10] offers
higher flow rates but limits control to three chambers due to
six integrated valves. Its Bluetooth communication reduces
wiring complexity, but is known to have latency on the
order of 10 ms [11], which may cause instability with high-
bandwidth real-time control loops. FlowIO [12] is small
and compact pressure control solution with several com-
munication APIs and many customization options. As it
is designed for small scale soft robots and wearables, the
pressure range (-30 to 30 psi) and flow rates (up to 3.2 L/min)
are unfortunately not sufficient for our applications.
Fig. 2. Two modules connected on a single RS485 bus for distributed
embedded control of large-scale soft robots. Each board is powered from
a common power bus (10-28V DC) for closed-loop control of up to 4
valve/chamber pairs. The dashed lines indicate that the bus can extend over
large physical distances.
Related to modeling the dynamics of these pneumatic
actuators, foundational texts like [3] and [4] derive models
for pneumatic chamber pressures of variable volume, but lack
specifics on mass flow rate and valves. Existing models like
ISO 6358 and manufacturer-provided valve models attempt
to model flow regimes and orifices but require extensive
system identification [13]. While nonlinear models are suc-
cessful in offline soft robotics simulations [14], real-time
hardware implementation demands more efficient methods.
Approaches like parameterized models [6] show promise, as
do simplified first-order pressure dynamics [5].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II-A presents the physical design and specifications
of PneuDrive and Section II-B presents our modeling toolkit
and a brief overview of each dynamic model. Section III
presents results from testing the PneuDrive in different
configurations as well as an in-depth evaluation of each
dynamic actuation model using our modeling toolkit.
II. METHODS
A. Hardware Design
1) Serial Communication: PneuDrive operates in a serial
bus configuration and is pin compatible with a number
of single board computers (e.g. Raspberry Pi, ODROID,
NVIDIA Jetson). The single board computer (SBC) should
be capable of running ROS if the pressure control system
will be used as a ROS node. Otherwise an SBC running
Ubuntu is sufficient. For our application, we chose to use
the ODROID N2+ running Ubuntu 20.04 and ROS Noetic.
The controller is connected to a series of daisy-chained
PneuDrive embedded boards with the two-wire RS485 bus
(see Fig. 2). Each embedded board is responsible for the
closed-loop control of up to four valve/chamber pairs. The
RS485 bus on PneuDrive offers tremendous flexibility to the
user because of its robustness to electrical interference, its
ability to function over large physical distances (theoretically
a limit of 1200 meters), and its reliability features such as
built-in electrostatic discharge (ESD), surge protection, and
hot plug-in support.
The daisy-chained PneuDrive embedded boards are as-
signed unique addresses through the Address Select Switch
(see Fig. 3). The switch allows up to four addresses on a
single RS485 bus, though a theoretical maximum of 256
Fig. 3. Onboard functionality of PneuDrive Embedded board.
devices is possible if addresses are programmed in software.
Device addresses start at 0xFFFF and decrement by one
for each successive device, avoiding conflicts with 10-bit
resolution ADC data which ranges from 0-1023 (0x0000
- 0x03FF). The communication protocol uses data packets
composed of five 16-bit integers as shown in Fig. 4. We
use the common ‘8N1’ serial configuration indicating eight
data bits, no parity bit, and one stop bit (see UART Data
Frame in Fig. 4). The controller initiates a transmission with
an outgoing packet containing pressure commands and the
addressed embedded device responds with pressure data. The
addresses are used as delimiters to avoid bus contention,
ensuring that only one device responds to outgoing packet
and that it is disregarded by other devices on the bus.
The RS485 implementation in PneuDrive is half-duplex
(meaning sending and receiving data cannot happen con-
currently) and only requires two wires. Each PneuDrive
embedded board defaults to ‘read’ mode and only switches
to ‘write’ mode when responding to an outgoing packet sent
from the PneuDrive controller (see Fig. 4). This functionality
is called ‘auto-direction’ and its implementation in Pneu-
Drive is based on a design released by Texas Instruments Inc.
[15]. A 555 timer in monostable mode is used to generate
a ‘write-enable’ pulse for a given duration when the first bit
of the incoming data packet is detected (i.e. the start bit of
the first data frame). The duration is slightly longer than the
transmission time of a full data packet. For example, at our
chosen baud rate of 1 Mbps, each bit has a pulse width of
1 µs. Accordingly, one data packet takes 100 µ s to transmit
so we need to choose an appropriate ‘write-enable’ pulse
time, which is calculated as tenable = 1.1RC (see 555 timer
datasheet). The tightest tolerance for commercially-available
capacitors is 5%, so we use C = .1µF±5%. The resistance R
we require is the lowest commercially-available resistor that
keeps tenable > 100µs in the worst tolerance case. Using the
propagation of error equation, R = 976Ω ± 1% meets our
needs and ensures a tenable = 107 ± 5µs. The duration of
the ‘write-enable’ pulse can be easily modified by changing
a single resistor. This feature simplifies the software required
to avoid bus collisions and data corruption that can occur if
devices enter ‘read’ mode prematurely.
Fig. 4. Communication Protocol for PneuDrive. Each data frame uses the
‘8N1’ serial setting for a total of 10 bits per data frame. Each 16-bit integer
requires two frames, for a total of 10 data frames per packet.
2) Electrical Description: Each PneuDrive Embedded
board can be powered from a range of 10-28V DC to
accommodate most pneumatic valves. The valves connected
to the board (V0-V3) will be driven at the voltage of the DC
Power Input (see Fig. 3). Both dual valve drivers are off-
the-shelf breakout boards that actively limit current to the
valves to 900 mA peak or 700 mA continuous. The current
limit can be adjusted to anywhere between 100-1400 mA
for a given application by changing a single current sense
resistor on the driver board, although additional heat sinking
is required for loads of more than 700 mA continuous. The
drivers are plugged into a socket above the PCB so there is
space for an additional heat sink if necessary.
An on-board buck converter regulates the DC power input
to nine volts to power the microcontroller and its peripherals.
The regulator can source up to 3.6 amps but the load from
PneuDrive will typically be much smaller than that – up to 1
amp. The microcontroller distributes its 5V logic throughout
the board to the other chips, with the exception of a dedicated
5V low-noise low dropout regulator (LDO) for exclusive use
of the analog pressure sensors (P0-P3).
Additionally, the required pins for a 5V I2C bus are broken
out for an easy option to add additional I2C sensors to
PneuDrive (e.g. temperature, IMU). The pins are compatible
with most I2C connection systems like Sparkfun Qwiic [16]
and Adafruit STEMMA QT [17].
The PneuDrive controller board does not have a dedicated
power input because it does not need to power valves. It uses
the 5V and 3.3V power pins available on the standard SBC
pinout. The controller also carries a 3.3V/5V bidirectional
logic level converter since most SBCs operate at a 3.3V logic
level and the PneuDrive embedded boards operate at a 5V
logic level.
3) Software Interface: The source code to run PneuDrive
is implemented in C++ for high performance, but we expose
the system in software via two different interfaces via a ROS
node or python scripts.
The PneuDrive ROS Node exposes each embedded device
on the bus via rostopics. Each embedded device consists
of a subscriber to a pressure command topic for incoming
command packets and a publisher for outgoing data packets
(see Fig. 4). The user of the PneuDrive ROS node simply
needs to publish commands to the pressure command topics
and subscribe to the pressure data topics.
The Python Scripting interface allows a user to access data
in a Python script, without using ROS. We use pybind11 [18]
to wrap the C++ source code into an importable module
called pneudrive_py. The following is an example of
how to use the API:
1 import numpy as np
2 from pneudrive_py import PressureController
3
4 uart_port = ’/dev/ttyS1’
5 num_devices = 4
6 my_controller = PressureController(uart_port,
num_devices)
7
8 #check communication with all expected devices
9 my_controller.ping_devices()
10
11 pressure_cmd = np.array([1,2,3,4])
12 for i in range(num_devices):
13 my_controller.set_pressure_commands(i,
pressure_cmd)
14 data = my_controller.get_pressure_data(i)
B. Pressure Dynamic Models
In this section, we provide a summary of each of the
dynamic models implemented in our modeling toolkit. We
chose these models in an effort to approximately span the
types of models available in the literature in order to provide
a useful reference guide for choosing an appropriate model,
with a specific focus on system identification. Fig. 5 is a
functional diagram depicting physical significance of the
variables used in this section.
1) Linear Model: The first model, which we refer to as
the linear model, is simply a first order-linear ODE on the
pressure p:
˙p = −αp + βpcmd. (1)
The authors of [5] chose this model based on observations
from a step command to a PID pressure controller. They
tuned α and β manually with a Model Predictive Controller
to improve performance. The linear model captures the fact
that the input dynamics (i.e. valves/pressures) are not fast
enough to be negligible. Such constraints are particularly
important for model-based control and especially common
for pneumatically-actuated soft robots. However, this model
completely neglects the coupling between the joint-space
dynamics and the input dynamics, which becomes substantial
as soft robots become larger, more dynamic, or exert large
forces on the environment.
2) Nonlinear Model: The second model, which we refer
to as the nonlinear model, is a first order, nonlinear ODE
derived from first-principles. We refer the reader to several
derivations of this model in [3], [4] and summarize the results
here.
The governing equation is
˙p = γ RT
V (q)( ˙min − ˙mout) − γ w ˙V ( ˙q)
V (q) p (2)
Fig. 5. Functional diagram demonstrating the physical meaning of
important variables in the pressure dynamic models for a pressure chamber
of variable volume.
where γ, R, and T are constants, V is volume, w is a
parameter to quantify volume model uncertainty, and q is
the joint angles of the robot.
For the mass flow rate, we choose
˙m = ACdΨ(pu, pd)pu
r
2
RT (3)
where Cd is a unit-less discharge coefficient and accounts
for losses stemming from a non-ideal orifice.
Note that by convention, mass m flows from a higher-
pressure upstream (pu) to a lower-pressure downstream ( pd),
resulting in
˙min = Ain(u)CdΨ(pu = psrc, pd = p)psrc
r
2
RT (4)
˙mout = Aout(u)CdΨ(pu = p, pd = patm)p
r
2
RT . (5)
We approximate the function that maps control input u
to the effective orifice input/output area Ain/out with the
smooth approximation to the typical ‘V’ shaped model for
proportional valves presented in [6]:
Ain(u) = Lin + smax

B (u − Uin) − Lin

(6)
Aout(u) = Lout + smax

B (Uout − u) − Lout

(7)
where
smax(x) =
√
x2 + 1 + x
2 . (8)
u is the input to the system and B scales the input units
to area units. In the case of PneuDrive, the input takes the
form of a voltage applied as a PWM signal to the motor
drivers so B has units of m2 V−1. The input/output leakage
of the valve in m2 is L. U corresponds to the input causing
zero output (i.e. the input center) and has units of V. To
demonstrate closed-loop pressure command tracking, we use
a simple proportional controller of the form
u = kp(pdes − p) (9)
though many other controllers could be implemented [1].
The flow function Ψ in (3) can take many forms. However,
a common choice is ISO 6358:
Ψ(pu, pd) =



ψmax
pd
pu
≤ b (choked)
ψmax

1 −
 pd
pu −b
a−b
β
pd
pu
> b (subsonic)
(10)
where
ψmax =
 2
γ + 1
 1
γ−1
r γ
γ + 1 (11)
is just a constant.
The volume terms in (2) ( V and ˙V ) are functions of the
configuration variables q and ˙q. The specific form of this
model will vary depending on the application and is often
uncertain in soft robots, hence the inclusion of the parameter
w in (2). We use the lengths derived in [19] for the cylindrical
continuum joints we intend to use:
l0 = h + ru
l1 = h − ru
l2 = h + rv
l3 = h − rv.
(12)
Note that q = [u, v] and that the volume of the ith chamber
is approximately Vi = πδ 2li(q), where δ is the radius of the
cylindrical pressure chamber.
˙V (q) is simply the time derivative of V
˙Vi(q) = πδ 2 ∂li
∂q
∂q
∂t (13)
Together, (2-13) constitute the complete nonlinear model,
with six parameters to fit: Lin, Lout, B, Uin, Uout, and w.
3) Parametric Model: The third model, which we call
the parametric model, was originally presented in [6]. While
it is inspired by first-principles, there are no physical laws
explicitly represented in this model:
ˆu = u − c1
¯g = g
 
c2ˆu + c3ˆu3
s = cb + cs¯g + c4 ˙V
¯k = k (ˆu, cγ, c9, c8)
r = c7¯k + c5 ˙V
1 + c6V
˙p(p, u, V, ˙V ; c) = (s − p) × r
(14)
The pressures p in the parametric model are driven to a
steady-state value s and a rate value r. The parameters c1-
c9 are the free parameters. Some of the parameters have
physical meaning, but most exist to provide a degree-of-
freedom to capture the correct function shape.
Fig. 6. Pressure response characteristics of a four-chamber pneumatic joint
to step commands from 50 to 300 kPa. Each response reflects the mean result
of ten trials with a 95% confidence interval over those same 10 trials.
4) Modeling Toolkit: The modeling toolkit presented as
part of this paper contains a Python module for each of these
three model types. Each module contains an implementation
of the model and a jupyter notebook with an example call
to LMFIT [20] for the user to easily identify the parameters
for each model and compare the results. The API allows the
user to save identified parameters and use them for open-loop
prediction or simulation of the system.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
1) PneuDrive Hardware Experiments: To test PneuDrive,
we evaluated step response characteristics and trajectory
tracking for a single-joint of four pressure chambers (see
https://bit.ly/3QkrEqO). The closed-loop step re-
sponse and tracking performance are shown in Fig. 6 and
Fig. 7 respectively. While the performance is excellent for
our application, there are clear differences between the
responses for each chamber. This is indicative of normal
variations associated with the joint hardware and volume-
coupled dynamics. Our proportional controller (9) does not
attempt to counteract this, but it is worth noting that the
models presented in this paper offer solutions for capturing
these effects that are present on the physical hardware.
PneuDrive embedded devices can easily be daisy-chained
together. To demonstrate this, we implemented PneuDrive
on a 1.16-meter-long pneumatic robot arm with three joints
and 12 pressure-controlled chambers, shown in Fig. 8. The
video linked above shows the arm following a smooth,
arbitrarily-chosen trajectory of commanded pressures. Table I
demonstrates the average control rates we achieved with
more embedded devices on the bus.
2) Modeling Experiments: In this section, we present
the results of using our modeling toolkit to find optimal
Fig. 7. Pressure trajectory tracking with a four-chamber pneumatic joint. Commands range from 50 kPa to 300 kPa. Each response reflects the mean
result of ten trials. The 95% confidence interval over those ten trials, due to its minimal visibility, has been omitted for clarity.
TABLE I
MEAN LOOP RATE AND STANDARD DEVIATION OVER 2044 ITERATIONS .
Number of Devices Mean (Hz) Standard Deviation (Hz)
1 1164.3 37.5
2 980.9 19.9
3 749.5 53.0
Fig. 8. PnueDrive implemented on a large-scale pneumatic robot 1.16m in
length. The arm consists of three embedded devices, each controlling four
pressure chambers.
parameters on a single joint with four chambers. We optimize
the parameters using 20,000 data points (200 seconds) of
real-time data as a training data set and 2,000 data points (20
seconds) as our validation data set. The validation trajectories
(see Fig. 9) are open-loop predictions of ˙p given only the
input signals for each model. To obtain the parameters we
initialize 20 optimizations with random initial conditions for
each model and keep the best set of parameters indicated
in the legend by the highest R2 value. These results are
shown in Fig. 9. Table II has the Integrated Absolute Error
(IAE) for each model over the 20 seconds of validation data.
The evaluation time is averaged across the chamber models
(C0 - C3). For each model type, a single optimization run
converges in under one second, enabling fast generation of
unique parameter sets for each chamber/valve pair, as shown
in Fig. 9.
In summary, we found that the nonlinear model typically
outperforms the linear and parametric models in accuracy. It
consistently converges to a good set of parameters and cap-
tures transient dynamics while maintaining low steady state
error at the cost of increased data processing and modeling
work. The parametric model also captures transient dynamics
without requiring extra data processing and modeling. The
parametric model optimization did not converge consistently
and typically exhibited worse steady state error. About 1/10
of the parametric optimizations converged to a usable model.
The linear model is by far the simplest to process data for.
It captures general trends consistently, as evidenced by the
second-lowest IAE in Table II, and has the lowest execution
time, all at the cost of model accuracy.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have presented PneuDrive as a modular, open-
source pressure control system tailored for large-scale
Fig. 9. Comparison of models for each chamber in open-loop prediction
of ˙p for 20 seconds of validation data
TABLE II
IAE VALUES FOR OPEN -LOOP PREDICTION FOR EACH CHAMBER (C0 -
C3) MODEL FOUND IN FIG. 9 IN GPA.
Model C0 C1 C2 C3 Eval Time (ms)
Linear 41.13 44.80 45.16 39.77 0.111
Non-Linear 35.84 37.43 27.51 31.56 0.628
Parametric 48.67 67.81 46.29 66.17 0.432
pneumatically-actuated soft robots. We have also demon-
strated the system on a distributed, large-scale soft robot. We
presented a modeling toolkit to facilitate system identifica-
tion and model comparison between several actuation models
useful for simulation. Together, these attributes enable future
research for distributed, large-scale soft robot hardware and
simulation applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Phillip Hyatt, Alexa Lindberg, Brianna
Taylor for their contributions during early prototypes of this
project.
REFERENCES
[1] M. St ¨olzle and C. D. Santina, “Piston-driven pneumatically-actuated
soft robots: Modeling and backstepping control,” IEEE Control Sys-
tems Letters , vol. 6, p. 1837–1842, 2022.
[2] J. W. Booth, J. C. Case, E. L. White, D. S. Shah, and R. Kramer-
Bottiglio, “An addressable pneumatic regulator for distributed control
of soft robots,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Soft
Robotics (RoboSoft) . Livorno: IEEE, Apr 2018, p. 25–30. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8404892/
[3] B. W. Andersen and R. C. Binder, “The analysis and design of
pneumatic systems,” 1967.
[4] P. Beater, Pneumatic drives . Springer, 2007.
[5] C. M. Best, M. T. Gillespie, P. Hyatt, L. Rupert, V . Sherrod, and M. D.
Killpack, “A new soft robot control method: Using model predictive
control for a pneumatically actuated humanoid,” IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 75–84, 2016.
[6] Y . Tassa, T. Wu, J. Movellan, and E. Todorov, “Modeling and
identification of pneumatic actuators,” in 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Mechatronics and Automation . Takamatsu, Kagawa,
Japan: IEEE, Aug 2013, p. 437–443. [Online]. Available: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6617958/
[7] B. J. Caasenbrood, F. E. van Beek, H. K. Chu, and I. A. Kuling, “A
desktop-sized platform for real-time control applications of pneumatic
soft robots,” in 2022 IEEE 5th International Conference on Soft
Robotics (RoboSoft) , Apr 2022, p. 217–223.
[8] “Robotics: The pnematicbox control system for soft hand
control.” [Online]. Available: https://www.robotics.tu-berlin.de/menue/
software tutorials/pneumaticbox/
[9] T. R. Young, M. S. Xavier, Y . K. Yong, and A. J. Fleming, “A control
and drive system for pneumatic soft robots: Pneusord,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). Prague, Czech Republic: IEEE, Sep 2021, p. 2822–2829.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9635874/
[10] L. Manfredi and A. Cuschieri, “A wireless compact control unit
(wiccu) for untethered pneumatic soft robots,” in 2019 2nd IEEE
International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) , Apr 2019, p.
31–36.
[11] D. Eridani, A. F. Rochim, and F. N. Cesara, “Comparative performance
study of esp-now, wi-fi, bluetooth protocols based on range, trans-
mission speed, latency, energy usage and barrier resistance,” in 2021
International Seminar on Application for Technology of Information
and Communication (iSemantic) , 2021, pp. 322–328.
[12] A. Shtarbanov, “Flowio development platform – the pneumatic
“raspberry pi” for soft robotics,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2021
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser. CHI
EA ’21. New York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[13] “Parameter identification and evaluation of a proportional directional
flow control valve model.” [Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/
10019.1/94124
[14] S. Joshi and J. Paik, “Pneumatic supply system parameter optimization
for soft actuators,” Soft Robotics, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 152–163, Apr 2021.
[15] T. Instruments, Automatic Direction Control RS-485 , 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ti.com/lit/ug/tidubw6/tidubw6.pdf?
ts=1696367957289&amp;ref url=https%253A%252F%252Fwww.
google.com%252F
[16] Sparkfun, “Sparkfun qwiic connect system.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.sparkfun.com/qwiic
[17] Adafruit, “Adafruit stemma qt.” [Online]. Available: https://learn.
adafruit.com/introducing-adafruit-stemma-qt
[18] W. Jakob, J. Rhinelander, and D. Moldovan, “pybind11
– seamless operability between c++11 and python,” 2017,
https://github.com/pybind/pybind11.
[19] T. F. Allen, L. Rupert, T. R. Duggan, G. Hein, and K. Albert,
“Closed-form non-singular constant-curvature continuum manipulator
kinematics,” in 2020 3rd IEEE International Conference on Soft
Robotics (RoboSoft) , New Haven, CT, USA, May 2020, p. 410–416,
tex.ids: allenClosedFormNonSingularConstantCurvature2020.
[20] M. Newville, R. Otten, A. Nelson, T. Stensitzki, A. Ingargiola,
D. Allan, A. Fox, F. Carter, Michał, R. Osborn, D. Pustakhod,
lneuhaus, S. Weigand, A. Aristov, Glenn, C. Deil, mgunyho,
Mark, A. L. R. Hansen, G. Pasquevich, L. Foks, N. Zobrist,
O. Frost, Stuermer, azelcer, A. Polloreno, A. Persaud, J. H. Nielsen,
M. Pompili, and S. Caldwell, “lmfit/lmfit-py: 1.2.1,” May 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7887568