SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through 
Instability for Responsive Interaction 
Yue Yang Lei Ren Chuang Chen Bin Hu 
yang_yue@zju.edu.cn renlei_design@zju.edu.cn chenchuang@zju.edu.cn hhzzybb@gmail.com 
Zhejiang University Zhejiang University Zhejiang University Hangzhou City University 
Hangzhou, China Hangzhou, China Hangzhou, China Hangzhou, China 
Zhuoyi Zhang Xinyan Li Yanchen Shen Kuangqi Zhu 
zhuoyi_zhang@zju.edu.cn leexinyan@tongji.edu.cn ssyys8@nottingham.edu.cn kuangqizhu@zju.edu.cn 
Zhejiang University Tongji University University of Nottingham Zhejiang University 
Hangzhou, China Shanghai, China Ningbo China Hangzhou, China 
Ningbo, China 
Junzhe Ji Yuyang Zhang Yongbo Ni Jiayi Wu 
jjunzhe@zju.edu.cn zhangyuyang@hzcu.edu.cn y.ni0420221@arts.ac.uk daiiisy.wu@gmail.com 
Zhejiang University Hangzhou City University University of the Arts Rhode Island School of 
Hangzhou, China Hangzhou, China London Design 
London, United Kingdom Rhode Island, United States 
Qi Wang Jiang Wu Lingyun Sun Ye Tao 
qiwangdesign@tongji.edu.cns jiang.wu@nottingham.edu.cn sunly@zju.edu.cn taoye@hzcu.edu.cn 
Tongji University University of Nottingham Zhejiang University Hangzhou City University 
Shanghai, China Ningbo China Hangzhou, China Hangzhou, China 
Ningbo, China 
Guanyun Wang∗ 
guanyun@zju.edu.cn 
Zhejiang University 
Hangzhou, China 
Figure 1: Applications that are designed based on SnapInflatables. (a) A wearable button with bouncing haptic feedback. (b) An 
interactive game controller that operates the seagull’s head and tail to control the wings to flap up and down. (c) Portable and 
deformable lighting. 
∗Corresponding author 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0330-0/24/05 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642933 
ABSTRACT 
Snap-through instability, like the rapid closure of the Venus flytrap, 
is gaining attention in robotics and HCI. It offers rapid shape recon-
figuration, self-sensing, actuation, and enhanced haptic feedback. 
However, conventional snap-through structures face limitations 
in fabrication efficiency, scale, and tunability. We introduce Snap-
Inflatables, enabling safe, multi-scale interaction with adjustable 
sensitivity and force reactions, utilizing the snap-through instabil-
ity of inflatables. We designed six types of heat-sealing structures 
enabling versatile snap-through passive motion of inflatables with 

CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
diverse reaction and trigger directions. A block structure enables 
ultra-sensitive states for rapid energy release and force amplifica-
tion. The motion range is facilitated by geometry parameters, while 
force feedback properties are tunable through internal pressure set-
tings. Based on experiments, we developed a design tool for creating 
desired inflatable snap-through shapes and motions, offering pre-
views and inflation simulations. Example applications, including a 
self-locking medical stretcher, interactive animals, a bounce button, 
and a large-scale light demonstrate enhanced passive interaction 
with inflatables. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and 
tools. 
KEYWORDS 
snap-through instability, inflatable, shape-changing interface, re-
sponsive interaction 
ACM Reference Format: 
Yue Yang, Lei Ren, Chuang Chen, Bin Hu, Zhuoyi Zhang, Xinyan Li, Yanchen 
Shen, Kuangqi Zhu, Junzhe Ji, Yuyang Zhang, Yongbo Ni, Jiayi Wu, Qi Wang, 
Jiang Wu, Lingyun Sun, Ye Tao, and Guanyun Wang. 2024. SnapInflatables: 
Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interac-
tion. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’24), May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642933 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Snap-through instability, observed in natural phenomena like the 
rapid closure of the Venus flytrap [11], has attracted attention in 
the field of robotics and human-computer interaction (HCI). It 
enables swift and reversible shape changes with minimal energy 
input, offering the potential for physical intelligence, including self-
sensing and actuation, within relatively simple structures. In HCI, 
structures exhibiting snap-through instability have been introduced 
to enhance haptic feedback [2], 3D print pop-up objects to save 
on manufacturing time and materials [30], reposition wearable 
devices for various use cases [9], and enable simple logic control 
[18]. Beyond HCI, snap-through instability is researched in the 
mechanical field and leveraged in robotics [5] for high-speed shape 
reconfiguration [32], adaptive sensing, rapid grasping [19], as well 
as electronics-free controls [10]. 
Despite their versatility and adaptiveness, the current methods 
for fabricating structures with snap-through instability primarily 
rely on mechanical assembly, 3D printing [3], origami folding [2, 19], 
or gel casting elastomers [20]. These fabrication techniques have 
limitations in terms of efficiency and accessibility when it comes 
to rapidly producing 3D structures with snap-through instability 
across various scales. Moreover, most of these structures have fixed 
force feedback characteristics once they are fabricated. 
Inflatable structures offer a unique opportunity to achieve snap-
through instability with adjustable force feedback. It supports the 
rapid fabrication of structures in multi-scales with the advantages 
of safety, portability, and ease of interaction. While inflated objects 
exhibit snap-through transformations when subjected to external 
overload [21], little research has been dedicated to analyzing and 
designing the snap-through instability of inflated objects. Most 
existing research and applications concerning inflatable structures 
focused on stability [33]. The instability of inflated structures under 
external force is generally meant to be avoided, and its potential 
for application in tangible interaction remains unexplored. 
SnapInflatables presents a novel approach to easily designing and 
fabricating inflatables with customized snap-through instability. By 
designing heat-sealing patterns, we achieve versatile snap-through 
passive motion of inflatables with varying reaction behaviors and 
trigger force directions. We also offer the option of ultra-sensitive 
states that enable rapid energy release and force amplification. We 
conducted a series of experiments to analyze these structures. The 
range of reactions is controlled by the geometry parameter, and 
the force feedback properties of the same object can be tunable 
through internal pressure settings. Since the shape and motion of 
inflated structures are hard to imagine, we developed an interac-
tive design tool that assists in the creation of customized inflatable 
structures with customized motion. This tool not only enables the 
set of motion types and the adjustment of motion range but also 
offers motion previews, inflation simulations, and fabrication files. 
Example applications, including self-locking medical stretchers, in-
teractive animals, and wearable bounce-back buttons, demonstrate 
the application of snap-through instability of inflatables in shape 
reconfiguring, self-sensing and responding, and haptic feedback. 
Compared to existing works in inflatable shape-changing in-
terfaces, SnapInflatables offers a novel option for shape-changing 
and interaction: leveraging the snap-through deformations of fully 
inflated objects under external triggers without the need for con-
tinually connecting bulky pumps to change the gas volume during 
use. We hope SnapInflatables to be an accessible yet powerful way 
for designers, makers, and manufactures to create inflatables at 
various scales with customized responsive interactions in various 
scenarios. 
The key contributions of this paper are as follows: 
• An accessible method of designing and fabricating inflata-
bles with tunable snap-through instability. We developed 
software that assists users in designing and previewing the 
interactive motion of inflatables and generating fabrication 
files, including parametric control of fabrication geometry 
and corresponding inflation simulation. 
• Design of inflatable structures with snap-through bistability: 
Based on the design of heat-sealing patterns, we present 
three types of inflatable structures with snap-through in-
stability in different motions, three types of indirect con-
trol units supporting input and reactions in different direc-
tions, and a blocking structure supporting transition to ultra-
sensitivity state. 
• Experiment analysis of tunable motion range and force 
behavior: We experimentally analyzed the motion range 
of structures with different geometry parameters, tuning 
force feedback and response speed through internal pressure 
change. 
• Example applications: We explore the application of snap-
through instability on inflated objects in shape reconstruc-
tion, self-sensing and responding, and haptic feedback, in-
cluding a self-responding healthcare stretcher, a series of 
interactive dynamic animals, and a wearable bounce button. 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
2 RELATED WORKS 
2.1
 Structure with Snap-Through Instability 
Snap-through instability represents a mechanical phenomenon 
characterized by the rapid transition between two stable states 
when subjected to an applied load. This phenomenon is marked 
by bistable mechanisms that emerge from geometric or material 
properties, making it possible to store and release energy for fast ac-
tuation. Bistable structures, once snapped into a stable state, do not 
require continuous power input to maintain their position, offering 
reconfigurability in specific applications. Furthermore, they often 
necessitate fewer components compared to traditional mechanisms. 
These properties have garnered significant attention due to their 
potential applications in robotics [5] for high-speed shape reconfig-
uration on land and underwater [32], adaptive sensing, and rapid 
grasping [19], as well as electronics-free controls [6, 8, 10]. In the 
field of HCI, structures exhibiting snap-through instability have 
been introduced to enhance haptic feedback [5], facilitate the fab-
rication of unfoldable objects to save on manufacturing time and 
materials [36], reposition wearable devices for various use cases 
[9], and enable simple logic control [18]. 
Current fabrications of bistable structures mostly rely on me-
chanical assembly, 3D printing [3], origami folding [2, 19], or casting 
elastomers [20]. However, these approaches are designed for spe-
cific application scenarios. Limited research has been conducted on 
snap instability through heat-sealing inflated objects, apart from 
the efforts within the aerospace domain [15], which involve only a 
singular moving direction. To afford this mechanism for a broader 
usage in HCI field with enhanced and sufficient fabrication effi-
ciency, scalability, and post-fabrication tunability. We design and 
fabricate inflated structures to broaden the usage of snap-through 
bistability. In our work, inflated structures offer compelling advan-
tages: (1) A plane object with heat-sealing pattern can quickly trans-
form into 3D bistable structures through inflation, enabling rapid 
manufacturing; (2) The fabrication of 3D inflated bistable struc-
tures is accessible across different scales; (3) Bistable inflatables 
can deflate for compact storage and transport; (4) The interaction 
feedback, particularly energy barriers and trigger forces, of the 
same object after fabrication is tunable by adjusting air pressure, fa-
cilitating adaptability to meet specific requirements. (5) Compared 
to traditional mechanical structures. Inflatable structures exhibit a 
cushioning effect, especially during abrupt shape transformations, 
enhancing safety for both individuals and objects. 
2.2 Inflatable Shape-Changing Interface and 
Interaction with Inflatables 
Inflatable shape-changing interfaces have found applications 
across diverse fields, including soft robotics, furniture [33], 
architecture[14], assistive devices[43], transportation tool [29], as 
well as virtual reality props and tactile feedback systems [17, 36]. In-
flated structures offer numerous advantages, including lightweight 
construction, cost-effectiveness, size scalability, and ease of storage. 
In HCI field, there has been a substantial accumulation of accessi-
ble and rapid manufacturing methods for inflatable devices. These 
methods encompass techniques such as heat-sealing through laser 
cutting [40], as well as CNC machining and 3D printing [7, 39, 42]. 
This versatility enables the fabrication of inflatable interfaces rang-
ing from micro-scale [25] to human-scale applications [33]. Re-
search in the design of inflatable interfaces has explored various 
aspects, including bending combinations [28, 31], as well as modu-
larized objects [4]. 
While versatile, most interactions with inflatable structures lever-
age shape alteration relying on volume changing, which requires 
continuous connections to inflation or deflation mechanisms such 
as bulky pumps, limiting their usage in broader real-life scenar-
ios. Despite the effort of improving control systems like flowIO 
[34] and liquid-to-gas drive device [27], the inflation and defla-
tion times are constrained by tube and pump power, which limit 
the response speed of inflatables during the interaction [36]. This 
limitation is especially evident in shape changes of inflatables in 
big scales [35, 37] and synchronization of digital interaction. Be-
sides, the shape change caused by deflation reduces the stiffness 
of an inflatable structure and limits its functional use. Some re-
searchers explore achieving the rapid and strong shape change and 
interaction behavior of inflated objects by adding tendon wires 
[29], employing smaller chambers to manipulate larger ones, and 
incorporating rigid elements [21]. 
Beyond shape changing as an output of interaction, researchers 
have been enabling sensing of inflatables by embedding sensors into 
inflatable structures for touch and slide interactions [35]. Another 
approach is leveraging physical intelligence; for example, fluid 
computation kits [26] explore sensing and signal processing by 
manipulating air passage and direction. In most cases, once an 
inflatable structure is fabricated and fully inflated, it typically settles 
into a single stable configuration. Researchers in the fields of HCI 
and robotics have primarily focused on the mechanical stability 
achieved after inflation. The design method and potential of inflated 
structures with multiple stable states after inflated, as well as the 
snap-through transitions between these stable states, remain largely 
unexplored. 
SnapInflatables achieves multiple stable states of inflatable struc-
ture in versatile directions through the design of heat-sealing pat-
terns. SnapInflatables explores the snap-through passive motion 
of inflated objects. It enables rapid and versatile shape change to 
multi-state states under external interaction without the need to 
connect to pumps. It enables inflated structure with simple self-
sensing and responsiveness without additional sensing and control 
devices. The aim is to broaden the design potential of inflatable 
structures for enhanced interaction possibilities. 
2.3 Designing Structures for Passive Feedback 
Augmentation 
Augmenting passive haptic feedback and passive motion control 
has demonstrated promising potential across various application 
contexts, such as enhancing existing everyday items, simulating 
force feedback for virtual reality (VR) props, and enhancing eyes-
free inputs on smart wearables. Researchers have explored the 
rapid personalized manufacturing of passive feedback and motion, 
leveraging passive mechanisms such as 3D printing spring [16], 3D 
printing linkages [22], 3D printing hinge, embedding Magnet [44], 
laser-cutting plastic compliant structures [23, 38], and cutting and 
folding Kirigami-based button [2]. 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
Although these methodologies have exhibited effectiveness in 
various scenarios, they may encounter constraints when applied 
to enhancing inflatable soft interfaces. This is mainly attributed to 
the introduction of rigid materials, which compromise the inherent 
benefits of inflatable objects, such as comfort, safety, and ease of 
storage. The non-linearity of inflated objects also presents chal-
lenges in employing these methodologies seamlessly. The approach 
of embedding haptic feedback on fabric, as demonstrated in [13], is 
not suitable for inflatable objects because digital embroidery would 
compromise the integrity of the inflatable structure. As such, there 
is a pressing need to devise approaches that enable the incorpora-
tion of passive tactile feedback or deformation effects into inflatable 
soft interfaces while preserving their advantages. 
SnapInflatables achieves the augmentation of passive feedback 
and simple motion control in inflated objects through heat-sealing 
structures. This approach preserves the advantages and use cases 
of inflated objects while remaining compatible with common man-
ufacturing methods of inflatables. 
3 OVERVIEW OF SNAPINFLATABLES 
3.1
 Machanism and Basic Behavior of 
SnapInflatables 
The snap-through instability of inflated objects comes from the bi-
directional bending mechanism similar to [31]. When a flat airbag 
composed of nearly inextensible materials is subjected to inflation, 
the outline of the airbag contracts inward due to expansion in 
the direction of thickness of the airbag in Figure 2a. During this 
process, the presence of point-like heat-sealed spots reduces nearby 
gas content, and limited contraction space on the plane facilitates 
the formation of radial creases. Additionally, at the edge of the 
airbag, limited contraction along the edge direction also leads to 
one or several creases. If two thermoplastic points are sufficient, 
these creases align along the line connecting them. The parallel 
tension stiffness of these "folded creases" increases while their 
vertical shear stiffness decreases. This internal change in stiffness 
gives rise to bistability (Figure 2b): Under the compression inward, 
the airbag tends to fold in regions with lower stiffness, with the 
option of two opposite directions. When a force exceeding a specific 
threshold is applied, the structure undergoes an abrupt transition 
to the alternative stable state, resulting in a tactile "click" sensation, 
and it remains in this state even after the force is released. 
3.2 Design Space 
We are motivated to harness the benefits of snap-through insta-
bility in SnapInflatables structures which opens up a new design 
space for creating tangible interaction with inflated objects without 
connecting a pump, enabling responsiveness to human input and 
environmental stimuli through snap-through transformations. We 
present a diagram described in Figure 3 to map out the design space 
of SnapInflatables: 
1) Motion type. SnapInflatables introduces heat-sealing struc-
tures primitives to achieve a wide array of bistable motions and a 
combination of control and output actions, with motions in differ-
ent planes and directions. 2) Motion range. The range of motion is 
controlled by the geometric parameters of the internal heat-sealed 
patterns. 3) Response speed and force. Response speed and force 
Figure 2: Mechanism of SnapInflatable with snap-through 
instability. (a) Inflation compresses the airbag externally 
towards the center. (b) The schematic representation of a 
potential energy curve is plotted to elucidate the fundamen-
tal principles underlying the snap-through buckling mecha-
nism. (c) Rapid switching of stable states. 
feedback can be finely tuned through adjustments of internal pres-
sure. 4) Trigger sensitivity. A blocking structure facilitates a rapid 
transition from a high-energy barrier to an ultra-sensitive state. 
5) Interaction Scale. The flexibility in size and materials allows 
for interaction across diverse scales, from fingertip to whole-body 
scale, and integration with existing inflatable objects. 
In our applications, we leverage the advantages of snap-through 
instability for interaction, including self-sensing and responsive 
behavior, shape reconstruction, and snap-through haptic feedback. 
4 STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF 
SNAPINFLATABLES 
Through the design of heat sealing patterns, we derive three major 
output motions and three indirect motion controls that have snap-
through instability. The direct motion unit and indirect control 
units are categorized by whether the external input force or motion 
and the reaction of the inflated airbag are in the same direction. 
Figure 4 gives an overview of the cut-and-sealing structure, stable 
state, and motion that each primitive offers. Below, we enumerate 
the structure and motion effect of each unit. 
4.1 Direct Control Types 
The direct motion units enable an inflated airbag with multiple 
stable states in various orientations. These states are associated 
with distinct shape transitions and motion effects, such as planar 
bending, vertical bending, and bidirectional coaxial twisting. As 
the structure was pushed or turned, it would rapidly transform 
into another state, like bending or twisting to the opposite side to 
preserve its stability. Each motion unit permits customization of 
motion range through the parameterization of its intrinsic pattern, 
which will be subjected to experimental analysis in forthcoming 
Section 5.1. Planar-Bend unit with bi-points configuration enabled 
an inflated object to bend laterally in the original plane prior to 
inflation (Figure 4a). This is due to the tendency of two points to 
form creases or exhibit a trend of forming creases, resulting in 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 3: Design space of SnapInflatables. 
Figure 4: The structural library of SnapInflatables. 
an increase in stiffness along the long axis of the inflatable. How-
ever, the overall inflatable experiences a contracting force due to 
inflation. Therefore, the entire bi-point inflatable structure can be 
equivalent to a buckled system composed of a spring and an elastic 
rob. Vertical-Bend with quadruple-point configurations permitted 
an inflated object to fold vertically to the original plane (Figure 
4b). Building upon the equivalent model of the bi-point configura-
tion, the addition of two points along the transverse central axis 
increases the transverse stiffness. The connecting lines and their 
extension to the edges of the inflatable enhance the transverse 
stiffness, equivalent to a transverse elastic beam. The two beams 
form a cross structure, making the behavior of the quadruple-point 
inflatable tend to resemble a buckled system folding around the 
transverse axis. Coaxial-Twist with penta-points configurations 
form two orthogonal folding creases on each surface, resulting in 
bistable states in the twisted position, allowing bidirectional torsion 
(Figure 4c). The five points create a cross-shaped folding crease, 
and the cross-shaped equivalent elastic rod structure restricts the 
bending deformation of the inflatable. However, due to the weaker 
stiffness at the central point, the inflatable can twist around here, 
and the creases at the points’ connecting lines also provide space 
for deformation. 
4.2 Indirect Control Types 
To enhance interaction with inflatable objects, our study system-
atically explored three indirect motion control units. These units 
were designed for situations where external forces, such as those 
exerted by humans, triggered responses from the inflatable object 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
that were different from the input. Additionally, these structures 
were engineered to enable minor input motions to produce sig-
nificant deformations or movements on a larger scale. This was 
achieved by strategically employing heat-sealing structures, elimi-
nating the need for additional mechanical elements. Each control 
unit displayed characteristics of snap-through instability, where an 
external force applied energy beyond a certain threshold, resulting 
in a snap-through buckling event. This phenomenon produced a 
distinct directional output motion, and the altered shape remained 
stable even after removing the applied force. 
T-Fold. The T-shaped inflatable structure, featuring a diamond 
arrangement of four points with an extra point below, divides the 
inflatable into three zones (see Figure 4d): left, right, and top regions. 
This design facilitates coordinated movements among the three 
segments, enabling multi-planar bending around their intersection 
point. In this setup, manipulating the two shorter arms (left and 
right) simultaneously influences the behavior of the third, top arm 
within the vertical plane. Applying inward pressure on the shorter 
arms induces their rotation towards the user in the horizontal 
plane. This action controls the top arm vertically, causing it to fold 
away from the user within the same plane. This interplay allows 
for complex, user-directed manipulation within a defined spatial 
configuration. As shown in Figure 4d, adding a lower point extends 
the vertical crease, facilitating lateral folding of the lower segment. 
When a contracting force is applied, the inflatable exhibits bistable 
buckling characteristics. The folding axes converge at the junction 
of the four points, fostering mutual coupling of movements in both 
vertical and horizontal planes. 
Cross-Fold. The Cross-fold unit is a cross-shaped inflatable 
object with two sets of diamond-patterned points arranged on op-
posing sides of its central region, connected by points in the middle 
(Figure 4e). This configuration allows for controlling lateral arms 
to drive the top and nether arms bending in the vertical direction, 
inversely, controlling the opening and closing of the top and nether 
arms enables the rotations of the other two arms in the horizontal 
plane. For example, if a user squeezes the left and right inflatables 
towards himself in the horizontal plane, he can control the rotation 
of the top and nether large inflatables away from himself with snap-
through feedback. The principle of this phenomenon is consistent 
with that of T-fold, with the difference being the mirroring on 
the other side of the T-shaped inflatable, achieving symmetrical 
deformation and control. 
Cross-Flip. Cross-Flip unit, a cross-shaped inflatable object with 
a central four-point configuration and extension points, exhibits 
snap-through instability (Figure 4f). Applying an input force at the 
center of the arch will trigger concave deformation, causing the 
surrounding arms to flip upward. The structure shown in Figure 4f 
is similar to that in Figure 4e, but the distance between the middle 
four points is larger, and the wrinkles near each point cannot be 
connected. Therefore, it fails to form a local saddle shape. However, 
for the entire symmetrical structure, it can be similarly considered 
as a cross-shaped elastic rod, the contracting force of the inflatable 
is equivalent to a cross-shaped spring. This configuration forms a 
planar buckled structure with a rhombus face in the middle, similar 
to the cap of a jam jar with two stable points, one above and one 
below. 
4.3 Block structure: Rapid Transition of Trigger 
Sensitivity 
To achieve an ultra-sensitive state, we introduce a "blocking" struc-
ture on the sides, which confines the bistable structure to its inter-
mediate state, situated between the stable states (Figure 5). During 
this phase, there is an exceptionally low energy barrier, and the 
stored strain energy approaches its maximum level, making it easy 
to trigger with efficient energy release. 
The bistable side wing structures in this study exhibited both 
stability and the capacity for rapid reshaping. This characteris-
tic facilitated a swift shift in trigger sensitivity within a single 
airbag, transitioning from a high-energy barrier state, which typi-
cally presents significant triggering challenges, to an ultra-sensitive 
state. Figure 5 delineates these effects. A rapid modification of the 
side wings’ state significantly reduced the minimum trigger force 
needed to initiate snap-through, potentially to as little as 5% of 
the maximum value, as demonstrated with steel balls of 100 g and 
5 g. The experimental configuration was meticulously controlled, 
maintaining a uniform distance of 8 cm from the joint to both the 
100 g and 5 g loads (Sample Size: 32 cm × 6 cm). To ensure the 
robustness and repeatability of results, this experimental protocol 
was meticulously executed 20 times. In three instances of the ex-
periment, the application of a 5g load failed to initiate activation. 
This is hypothesized to be attributable to a positional deviation in 
the blocking structure, compromising its sensitivity. 
Figure 5: Transition of trigger sensitivity through block struc-
ture. (a) High energy barrier state with a load of 100 g. (b) 
Changing the folding direction of the block structures. (c) 
Close-up view of block structure. The original inflatables 
switch to an ultra-sensitive state and will be triggered by a 
load of 5 g. 
5 INVESTIGATION ON TUNABLE MOTION 
Various parameters, such as structure and internal pressure, can 
affect the snap-through motion characteristics of inflatables. Cur-
rently, there is no standardized design method for creating inflata-
bles with snap-through disability. SnapInflatables allows tunable 
bistability in different methods. In this section, we validate and 
evaluate the general applicability of the proposed structure and 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 6: Testing key geometrical parameters of six kinds of motion types. 
establish a systematic design methodology by comparing the trig-
ger force of steady-state switching, the deformation effect, and the 
response time of the structure under different design parameters. 
All test samples in Section 5 were made by nylon-coated TPU 
material (yarn density of 210 D). The manufacturing process of 
all test samples follows a methodology similar to [7]. Specifically, 
a 3D printer was promptly modified to thermally seal the nylon-
coated TPU with the same parameters (200 ℃, 100 mm/min) used 
for all inflatable samples. Heat-sealable fabrics with thermoplastic 
coatings are readily available commercially, and the stacked layer 
assembly of such fabrics is a well-established process in the textile 
industry for the rapid and low-cost production of textile laminates 
at scale. 
5.1 Geometry Parameter 
The geometric parameters of the heat-sealing pattern, including 
point size, spacing, and proximity to edges, have a notable impact 
on steady-state characteristics. Our key test parameter is point 
spacing, with a primary focus on investigating the range of motion, 
particularly the steady-state position. The main body width of the 
test samples is 60 mm. Data were derived from min-max plots with 
three repeated experiments per setup. 
5.1.1 Two Points: Planar-Bend. Increasing the distance between 
two points from 10 mm to 70 mm in 10 mm increments, we observe 
an increase followed by a decrease in the planar bending angles, 
peaking at 48.3° torsion at 40 mm, as shown in Figure 6 a. If the 
distance is too far, the two points become difficult to interact with 
each other, while if the distance is too short, the two points can be 
regarded as one point. 
5.1.2 Four Points: Vertical-Bend. For the Vertical-Bend structure, 
both vertical and horizontal point distances are key geometric pa-
rameters. To facilitate measurement and achieve the most notice-
able deformation angles, we fixed the horizontal distance at 20 
mm and varied the vertical distance from 10 mm to 50 mm in 10 
mm increments, resulting in a gradual decrease in the inflatables’ 
vertical bending angle (Figure 6b). 
5.1.3 Five Points: Coaxial-Twist. In the Coaxial-Twist structure 
with a fixed center point, angles between the line from the non-
central point to the center point and the horizontal were adjusted 
from 15° to 65°, increasing by 5° intervals. The torsional motion 
range first increases, then decreases with angle changes, peaking at 
36.7° torsion at 50° (Figure 6c). This is because as the angle decreases, 
the angular crease formed from point to point also decreases, while 
when the angle increases, the distance between points becomes too 
large, reducing the pinning effect. 
5.1.4 T-Fold and Cross-Fold. The T-Fold structure and Cross-Fold 
structure, derived from the Vertical-Bend structure, demonstrate 
deformation range patterns affected by vertical point distance. This 
aligns with the experimental results of the Vertical-Bend structure, 
indicating a larger range of motion with a smaller vertical point 
distance (Figure 6d and e). 
5.1.5 Cross-Flip. In the Cross-Flip structure test, by fixing four 
points on the outer ring and adjusting the distance between them 
and four points on the inner ring, we observed a maximum arch 
height of 38.4 mm(indicating a larger motion range) at a 30 mm 
distance(Figure 6f). We noted that when the distance fell below 
20mm, the expansion height of the central airbag surpassed the 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
entire airbag’s arch height, resulting in the absence of snap-through 
instability. 
5.2 Scale 
Upon scaling the structure to different sizes, consistent snap-
through instability and similar motions were observed across all 
sizes. Furthermore, the influence of Geometry Parameters on the 
motion range, as detailed in Section 5.1, displayed similar trends in 
airbags of varying sizes. 
We compare the deformation angles of six different structures 
in large and small samples with a 4:1 size ratio. In the Cross-Fold 
structure, the small sample was 15 mm wide, and the large one was 
60 mm to ensure heat-sealing the sample in a single process. For the 
other five structures, the small samples were 30 mm wide, and the 
large ones were 120 mm. The experimental data exhibited consistent 
deformation angles between the large and small samples (Figure 7). 
However, subtle differences in the motion range were noted upon 
uniform scaling, particularly in the Planar-Bend structural units. 
This discrepancy was postulated to be the result of several factors: 
(1) non-proportional scaling of print path widths, causing uneven 
changes in the rigidity of the indented areas; (2) gravitational effects 
on different sizes; (3) fluctuations in inflation and compression at 
the airbag’s bending point, restricting its motion range; and (4) vari-
ations in print quality across batches. These elements contributed 
to inaccuracies in the anticipated motion range within our software 
tool. 
Figure 7: Testing different scales of six kinds of motion types. 
5.3 Internal Air Pressure 
Different internal pressures can adjust the interactive performance 
of the inflatable structure. For bistability performance, increased 
internal pressure enhanced airbag rigidity [41], subsequently in-
creasing the trigger force and response speed [12]. 
A four-point Vertical Bend motion type was employed as an 
example to assess this effect, measuring trigger force, response time, 
and bending angle in 140 mm by 60 mm inflatables. The inflatables 
were filled for accurate internal pressure measurements using a 
pressure-regulating valve. Figure 8 revealed a positive correlation 
between trigger force and air pressure, with a 2.5-fold variation 
in trigger force. Conversely, steady-state switching response time 
was inversely related to air pressure, showing a 3.5-fold variation. 
Changes in pressure have minimal impact on airbag deformation 
(less than 1° difference), demonstrating the effectiveness of pressure 
adjustments in modulating airbag force behavior. 
Figure 8: Internal air pressure testing. (a) Adjusting the in-
ternal air pressure of an already-made airbag can modify its 
performance of snap-through instability. The trigger force 
of the airbag is positively correlated with the air pressure, 
while the response time is negatively correlated with the 
air pressure. (b) Experimental setup of force measurement 
parameters. 
6 DESIGN TOOL 
Since the shape and motion of inflatables are hard to imagine, 
We developed a design tool to conveniently customize interactive 
inflatable structures with multi-stable properties. The design tool 
is a plugin for Rhinoceros1 , built with Grasshopper2 , Kangaroo3 
and HumanUI4 . 
The tool mainly consists of three parts, including Joint Type 
Selection, Joint Adjustment, and Inflation Preview. The Joint Type 
Selection panel provides 6 types of motion for users to choose from. 
The Joint Adjustment panel contains the location button and adjust-
ment settings for the designed motion. Users can drag the Motion 
Range slider to parameterize motion range and rapidly preview 
the motion of 2D patterns. Finally, the Inflation Preview panel al-
lows the user to view the 3D inflation simulation, which facilitates 
user-driven design iterations for inflatable interaction behavior. 
6.1 Design Walkthrough 
In this section, we provide an example design walkthrough of using 
our design tool to create a 3D interactive inflatable seagull (Figure 
10). For this, the user needs to design the motion joints on the 
seagull. The whole design platform of the seagull is based on the 
2D and 3D environment of Rhinoceros. 
Step 1. Import Outline: In the Rhino editing environment, a user 
first clicks the Import Outline button to import a 2D seagull outline. 
(Figure 9a). 
Step 2. Select Type: The design tool allows the user to choose the 
desired type of motion from the drop-down list. The icons above 
introduce six motion types, once the user selects one, the Guidance 
1https://www.rhino3d.com/
2https://www.grasshopper3d.com/
3https://www.food4rhino.com/en/app/kangaroo-physics
4https://www.food4rhino.com/en/app/human-ui 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
Figure 9: Interface of SnapInflatable design tool. 
Figure 10: SnapInflatable workflow: (a) Import 2D outline. (b) Choose the target motion type. (c) Set the joint position. (d) 
Preview and adjust the motion range. (e) Simulate the inflating effect and the switch of stable states. (f) (Optional) Add another 
joint and repeat the previous steps. (g) Export the generated printable pattern. 
image will pop up below to show the referenced motion effect of 
the chosen type (Figure 9a). 
Step 3. Set Location: After selecting a motion type, the user is 
required to set the joint location to decide which parts of the seagull 
are going to rotate. According to the Guidance which shows an 
example of the location, the user clicks the Set Location button and 
selects the specified area on the seagull outline (Figure 9a). After 
the selection, the tool captures possible operation failures: if the 
size of the imported model is not suitable for the joint, the joint will 
not be able to perform the original motion. Therefore, we added 
an Alerting Function to report errors and remind users to leave 
enough space for the joint (Figure 11). Besides, we also display 
design guidance for each motion type to help users better set the 
joint location. 
Step 4. Adjust Range: To obtain a rapid preview of the designed 
motion, the user can open the Motion Preview button and drag the 
Adjust Range slider to set the motion range. Then the user can adjust 
the motion between two stable states and preview the deformation 
of the 2D seagull pattern, which presents a synchronized three-
dimensional effect of the flattened geometry folding (Figure 9a). 
Optional steps. In this case, the seagull has more than one mov-
able joint with different motion types. Our tool allows the user to 
add more joints by clicking the Add Joint button and repeating the 
above steps (Figure 9a). For the Y-bend motion type, the user can 
also choose to Add Ultra-sensitive Structures by clicking the button 
(Figure 9b). 
Step 5. Simulation: Then the user can open the Start Inflation 
Preview button to see the inflated simulation of the selected joint 
in the 3D view. Basically, the user can switch the stimulation states 
through the Stable State options (Figure 9b). And if the user needs to 
preview the entire inflated simulation again from the beginning 2D 
pattern, the Process Refresh button is there to realize it. Furthermore, 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
Figure 11: Joint Location Instruction. (a) The interface will present the corresponding guidance picture after the user selects 
the motion type, allowing the user to see the reference effect and remind to enter a red line or wireframe to set the joint. (b-c) 
Alerting function: The semi-transparent area indicates the space required when positioning the joint. If the external outline is 
too short relative to the joint (b), or the distance between the two is too close when placing multiple joints (c), the software 
interface will display Error text, and the modeling area will show the visual alert. 
if the user chooses more than one joint, our design tool will provide 
an extra drop-list called Main Joint. The user can select one of the 
joints from the drop list and choose its state. This function allows 
the user to rapidly switch the desired state of different joints to 
obtain different simulation results. 
Step 6. Export: Finally, the user engages the Export function 
to generate a 2D printable schematic, which amalgamates the ini-
tially outlined design with the motion structure conceived. This 
schematic is subsequently inputted into a 3D printer, facilitating 
the tangible realization of the model (refer to Figure 9b). 
In terms of customization, the user possesses the option to either 
irrevocably seal the air injection port or affix a valve apparatus to 
the inflatables, contingent upon the specific requirements of the 
application. This modification enables repeated inflation and defla-
tion cycles and permits fine-tuning of the trigger force associated 
with the bistable structure. 
7 ASSISTIVE STRUCTURES 
Figure 12: Assistive structures. (a) Assistive Kirigami struc-
ture for fixing inflatables. (b) Self-sealing structure. (c) Gas 
blocking and pressure adjusting structure for force adjust-
ment. 
7.1 Assistive Fixed Structure 
We designed a structure enabling users to attach inflatables to di-
verse objects, such as stretchers, large inflatable products, and even 
human bodies (see Figure 12a). Since fixing any point of the de-
formable structure onto the original object is impractical due to the 
need for all inflated structure points to move relative to the original 
object, we devised edges with flexible Kirigami structure beyond 
securing inflatables using velcro and hot pressing directly onto 
existing surfaces, inspired by [2], This Kirigami structure permits 
the attachment of the deformable structure to the existing object’s 
surface while allowing its edges to move freely. The tensile proper-
ties of the Kirigami structure influence the snap-through instability. 
A densely cut Kirigami structure with sufficient stretchability en-
ables the inflatable to exhibit bistable behavior, while a sparsely 
cut Kirigami with limited stretchability results in a monostable 
behavior with bounce-back effects. 
7.2 Self-Sealing Structure 
A flipped multi-layer structure near the air inlet that utilizes the 
expansion of the inflated airbag to squeeze the air opening (Figure 
12b). This allows the airbag to automatically seal after inflation 
without the need to connect an air hose. When it is time to deflate 
or re-inflate, the inlet port can be directly inserted by the air tube 
to adjust the gas status again. 
7.3 Gas Blocking Structure 
A narrow airway between the bistable structure and the additional 
storage inflatables allows the gas to flow between the two spaces 
only when manually applying force to the critical area and remains 
in the new stable state after the external force is removed (Figure 
12c). This allows the user to manually change the inflation level of 
the inflatables, which is used to change the form factor and force 
behavior as mentioned in Section 5.3. 
8 APPLICATION EXAMPLES 
8.1
 Responsive Self-Locking Stretcher 
The self-sensing and rapid actuation of SnapInflatables makes it suit-
able for emergency rescue. In this study, we developed a stretcher 
that can quickly self-lock using the bistable structure in Figure 13. 
When medical staff lifts the patient onto the stretcher, the gravity 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
of the patient triggers the bistable structure to quickly switch states, 
make the Velcro at the end of the trap contact and bond together, 
forming an "inflatable belt" that limits and protects the body of the 
patient. This design eliminates the need for traditional elastic bands 
on the stretcher, improving treatment speed. 
Figure 13: Responsive self-locking stretcher. 
8.2 Interactive Inflatable Animals 
Snap-through instability can create fascinating interactive behav-
iors. We have utilized bionic design to create several interactive 
animals (Figure 14), ensuring both playability and interaction safety. 
For instance, we applied cross-control in a seagull mechanism, 
making its wings move up and down by oscillating its head and 
tail (Figure 14a). The circuits embedded on the surface can detect 
bistable transformations through changes in connectivity. The sig-
nals are transmitted via Bluetooth to a computing device, serving as 
a game controller. Users can manipulate the posture of this realistic 
bird to control the flight of a digital bird in the game. 
Figure 14: Interactive inflatable bionic design. (a) The 
Fluttering-seagull game controller with circuits embedded to 
virtually play the Flappy Bird game. (b) The shape-shifting 
lizard. (c) The elephant whose nose drives its ears. 
We have also developed a shape-changing lizard with multiple 
joints that can move its head, limbs, and body trunk in various 
directions (Figure 14b). Users could select different target poses 
for storytelling. In another case, a bistable structure in the trunk 
region induces a sudden change in the shape of the elephant’s 
ears indirectly, causing them to stand upright when the trunk is 
pulled downward (Figure 14c). Upon release, the elephant’s ears can 
remain raised. Additionally, the trunk exhibits flexibility, allowing 
it to bend at different angles. 
8.3 Bounce-Back Wearable Button 
Inflatables with snap-through bistability provide tactile feedback. 
We integrated a button into clothing with click-feel bounce-back 
haptic feedback (Figure 15), facilitating the sick and the elderly 
to report situations and call for help during emergencies. This 
enables reporting and seeking assistance without using a phone 
or relying on visual contact. The material of inflatables is durable, 
washable, and seamlessly integrates with common fabrics through 
heat-sealing, making it highly suitable for wearable applications. 
The button structure itself possesses bistability. After being installed 
on clothing, when pressed, the button experiences resistance and 
rebound from the elastic surface of the skin, causing the button 
to bounce back. This feature enables continuous and repeated use. 
This feature enables users to repeatedly press the button and receive 
continuous tactile feedback. 
Figure 15: Wearable Button with snap-through bounce back 
haptic feedback. 
8.4 Large-scale Deformable Lighting 
SnapInflatable can be used to create large and lightweight furniture, 
offering tactile feedback for interaction. Figure 16 displays a light, 
safe, and easily storable lamp that measures 1.45 m long when 
inflated. The bistable structure can alter the lamp’s shape and switch 
the circuits on both sides, changing the light direction and providing 
a natural and comfortable interaction. 
Figure 16: Large-scale deformable lighting (a) Portable stor-
age state of the lamp; (b) Opened after inflation; (c-d) Bistable 
switching of lighting direction. 
8.5 Shoelace-free Sneakers 
SnapInflatables can be integrated into the shoe sole, using bistable 
inflatables to provide more convenient securing measures than 
shoelaces. When the user steps into the shoes, the bistable struc-
ture in the sole experiences force, triggering a state change and 
automatically securing around the ankle. When taking off the shoes, 
the user can step on the heel, utilizing the bistable transition to 
easily slip out. Compared to concept shoes with similar functions 
relying on mechanical hinges, SnapInflatables allows the sole to 
possess bistable characteristics while being seamlessly integrated 
during fabrication. 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
Figure 17: Shoelace-free sneakers (a-b) Sneakers in idle state 
with the opening wide. (c) When pressure is applied to the 
sole of the sneakers, it triggers a stable state transformation, 
resulting in the flattening of the sole. 
9 DISCUSSION, LIMITATION, AND FUTURE 
WORK 
9.1
 Size, Thickness & Material 
The fabrication of large-sized inflatables can be achieved through 
various methods, including CNC and manual ironing for heat press-
ing. We have accumulated some experience creating heat-sealing 
patterns with an FDM 3D printer, especially considering its lim-
ited build-platform size. In terms of print path settings, we suggest 
dividing large-sized patterns, leaving some overlapping areas to 
enhance durability and stability at the joints, and placing auxiliary 
alignment points around the split patterns for better alignment. 
Regarding hardware, placing long rollers at the bottom sides of 
the raised printer platform enables sectional printing of materials. 
When creating large-sized bistable inflatables, the heat-pressed in-
flatables’ wiring diameter cannot be increased using the printer, 
and the heat-pressed points are prone to stretching. Future work 
can focus on further optimizing software design tools and hard-
ware modifications to expand the printer’s capability for producing 
large-sized inflatables. 
We have conducted initial tests to examine the influence of vary-
ing sizes, thicknesses, and materials on triggering force. The results 
indicate a positive correlation between thicker materials, larger 
sizes, and increased triggering force. 
9.2 Robustness and Safety 
To evaluate the robustness and safety of SnapInflatables, we con-
ducted a test where a person weighing 73.2 kg stood on the inflata-
bles without any support. The results showed that the inflatables 
did not rupture, and their trigger force, deformation degree, and 
other parameters did not change significantly. 
9.3 Fatigue Test and Durability 
To assess the durability and performance of our inflatable system, 
we conducted a comprehensive evaluation involving repetitive ac-
tuation of the inflatables. Using a robotic arm, we moved the inflata-
bles back and forth 1000 times, constantly switching its steady state. 
The test results showed that the changes in deformation degree, 
trigger force, and response time were less than 5%, demonstrating 
the durability of SnapInflatables. 
Figure 18: (a) Varying yarn density in nylon-coated TPU sam-
ples resulted in trigger force differences from 9.69 N to 4.63 
N. (b) Tested samples of different sizes (70 mm × 30 mm to 
280 mm × 120 mm) exhibited trigger force variations, with 
the largest airbag at 10.23 N and the smallest at 2.02 N. (c) Ma-
terial tests, including nylon-coated TPU, Polyamide coated 
Polyethylene, and TPU, demonstrated suitability for con-
structing bistable structures with trigger forces ranging from 
1.07 N to 4.63 N. 
Inflatable structures inevitably experience minor air leakage over 
time, which can alter the triggering force and response speed. We 
conducted a preliminary control experiment. The triggering force 
and response speed decrease by 5% after 14 days. The rate of air 
leakage is similar to that of common existing airbag products and 
remains within an acceptable range, not significantly impacting 
usability. 
9.4 Mechanical Analysis of Instability 
In this paper, we have presented a comprehensive behavior library 
of SnapInflatables, along with the design tool and user interface. 
However, due to the significant nonlinearity of air aerodynamics, 
detailed mechanical calculations and dynamic simulations have 
not been included yet. Our future work will incorporate quantita-
tive mechanical feedback to elucidate the governing rules of the 
airbag structure under various input excitations and dynamic re-
sponse characteristics including internal air pressure, trigger force, 
response time, and bending angle. To deliver more precise simula-
tion results, future iterations of the design tool will also focus on 
integration with finite element analysis (FEA) platforms tailored for 
inflatable structures. This endeavor aims to enhance the adaptabil-
ity of our design software in meeting users’ specific requirements, 
thereby stimulating a broader design space. 
9.5 Choice of Heat-Sealing Patterns 
This study’s core investigation centered on the use of dot-shaped 
indentations to control snap-through instability. Future research 
will extend to line indentations and inflatable contour designs for 
similar effects. Dot indentations were chosen primarily for their 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
unique coaxial twisting potential and their ease of fabrication, en-
hancing manufacturing efficiency and alignment with heat-sealing 
tools. Such simplicity of use made reconfigurable dot-shaped in-
dentations an exciting future endeavor and exploration, inspired 
by [1]. 
In our preliminary experiments, strong magnets were used as 
an alternative to heat-sealing to achieve bi-stable control (Figure 
19). Magnets that attract on the opposite surface of the inflatables 
were observed to induce a degree of bistability, especially when the 
internal air pressure was relatively low. This discovery validates 
the potential for reconfiguring the positions, types, and behavior of 
bistable structures within the inflatables. However, it is important to 
note that when the internal air pressure becomes too high, magnets 
may disengage. Therefore, future work may explore more powerful 
methods to achieve reconfiguration. 
Figure 19: Exploring experiments involving the creation of 
structures with snap-through instability using repositionable 
magnets. 
9.6 Other Influence Factor of Snap-Through 
Instability 
In addition to the factors we have analyzed and experimented with 
previously, stable states are influenced by various other factors. 
Heat Sealing Direction. The stability of the two stable states 
slightly differs, and it is associated with the direction of the heat-
sealing patterns. Similar to what has been observed with Aero-
Morph [31], the inflatables tend to fold preferentially in the direc-
tion of the 3D-printed heat-sealing lines. This direction corresponds 
to stronger stability in the stable state. 
Edges. The presence of excess material on the outer edges of 
the inflatable plays a significant role. The folding direction of the 
material affects stability. By minimizing excess material at the edges 
or strategically increasing it, we can achieve effects similar to rein-
forcing the locking of the inflatables in a particular stable state. 
Manipulating the edges in this manner generates an asymmet-
rical triggering force in the overall bistable property. Excessive 
thickness in edge materials can even lead to inflatables exhibiting 
mechanical performance resembling a singular stable state. This 
observed relationship allows us to effectively modulate the force 
behavior of a single inflatable object by adjusting its inflation pres-
sure. 
9.7 Force Limit with Potential Design Scenarios 
The motion hinges created by the heat-sealing patterns have a 
restricted trigger force and limited force feedback, consequently 
constraining the length of arms they can actuate. Despite this lim-
itation, they possess significant potential applications in security 
interactions, including haptic feedback and information display. 
For scenarios demanding a more robust force, supplementary ac-
cessories like Velcro can be employed to enhance the force. Self-
responsive inflatables can trigger the combination of accessories 
like Velcro for augmented force. 
9.8 Actuation Methods and Compatibility with 
Other Technologies 
Our structural design is adaptable to various triggering sources 
other than mechanical loading. It can respond to diverse actuation 
inputs, including temperature, moisture, light, electricity, or shape 
memory alloy (SMA) [32], as well as magnetic fields. In the fu-
ture, it can be integrated with mobile robots [24] to expand spatial 
interaction possibilities. Furthermore, our structure, designed for 
rapid response effects, complements existing fabrication methods 
of inflatables, such as those described in [33]. 
10 CONCLUSION 
In this study, we present an innovative approach to designing 
and fabricating inflatables that harness the power of snap-through 
instability for responsive interaction. Our methodology involves 
six types of heat-sealing patterns that induce snap-through mo-
tions and offer control operations in versatile directions within 
inflatables. The incorporation of a block structure allows for swift 
transitions to an ultra-sensitive state, triggered by a force change 
to just 5% of its maximum value. Through experimental analyses, 
we have effectively controlled the motion range via geometry pat-
terns and adjusted force behavior by modulating internal pressure. 
Furthermore, we have developed a design tool that facilitates the 
creation and visualization of custom inflatables, tailoring shape 
change effects and motion interactions. Demonstrated applications 
of SnapInflatables, including healthcare stretchers, dynamic inter-
active animals, and a wearable bounce button, have highlighted 
the immense potential of inflatable objects featuring snap-through 
instability. These applications showcase their capabilities in shape 
reconfiguration, self-sensing and actuation, and enhancement of 
haptic feedback. Notably, SnapInflatables allow for rapid passive 
interaction without the need for continuous pumps. Looking ahead, 
we envision SnapInflatables revolutionizing the way designers and 
manufacturers leverage inflatable technology to create interactive 
experiences across diverse scales and scenarios. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project is supported by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China under Grant No. LR24F020001 and No. 
LY23F020020, as well as the Fundamental Research Funds for the 
Central Universities (No. 2022FZZX01-22). We extend our apprecia-
tion to Yitong Wang for her contributions to the initial experiments 
and ideation, Ye Jian for suggesting lighting applications and pro-
viding assistance with figure typography, and Haotian Chen for 
aiding in the evaluation experiments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Robert L. Baines, Sree Kalyan Patiballa, and Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio. 2021. 
Rapidly Reconfigurable Inextensible Inflatables. In 2021 IEEE 4th International 
Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft). IEEE, New Haven, CT, USA, 29–34. https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/RoboSoft51838.2021.9479435 
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Yue Yang, et al. 
[2]
 Zekun Chang, Tung D. Ta, Koya Narumi, Heeju Kim, Fuminori Okuya, Dongchi 
Li, Kunihiro Kato, Jie Qi, Yoshinobu Miyamoto, Kazuya Saito, and Yoshihiro 
Kawahara. 2020. Kirigami Haptic Swatches: Design Methods for Cut-and-Fold 
Haptic Feedback Mechanisms. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–12. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376655 
[3] Tian Chen, Mark Pauly, and Pedro M. Reis. 2021. A reprogrammable mechanical 
metamaterial with stable memory. Nature 589, 7842 (Jan. 2021), 386–390. https: 
//doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03123-5 
[4] Yu-Wen Chen, Wei-Ju Lin, Yi Chen, and Lung-Pan Cheng. 2021. PneuSeries: 
3D Shape Forming with Modularized Serial-Connected Inflatables. In The 34th 
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, Virtual 
Event USA, 431–440. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474760 
[5] Yinding Chi, Yanbin Li, Yao Zhao, Yaoye Hong, Yichao Tang, and Jie Yin. 2022. 
Bistable and Multistable Actuators for Soft Robots: Structures, Materials, and 
Functionalities. Advanced Materials 34, 19 (May 2022), 2110384. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.202110384 
[6] Jun Kyu Choe, Junsoo Kim, Hyeonseo Song, Joonbum Bae, and Jiyun Kim. 2023. A 
soft, self-sensing tensile valve for perceptive soft robots. Nature Communications 
14, 1 (July 2023), 3942. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39691-z 
[7] Kyung Yun Choi and Hiroshi Ishii. 2021. Therms-Up!: DIY Inflatables and In-
teractive Materials by Upcycling Wasted Thermoplastic Bags. In Proceedings 
of the Fifteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied 
Interaction. ACM, Salzburg Austria, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3430524.3442457 
[8] Colter J. Decker, Haihui Joy Jiang, Markus P. Nemitz, Samuel E. Root, Anoop 
Rajappan, Jonathan T. Alvarez, Jovanna Tracz, Lukas Wille, Daniel J. Preston, 
and George M. Whitesides. 2022. Programmable soft valves for digital and analog 
control. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, 40 (Oct. 2022), 
e2205922119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2205922119 
[9] David Dobbelstein, Tobias Arnold, and Enrico Rukzio. 2018. Snapband: a flexible 
multi-location touch input band. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International 
Symposium on Wearable Computers. ACM, Singapore Singapore, 214–215. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3267242.3267248 
[10] Dylan Drotman, Saurabh Jadhav, David Sharp, Christian Chan, and Michael T. 
Tolley. 2021. Electronics-free pneumatic circuits for controlling soft-legged robots. 
Science Robotics 6, 51 (Feb. 2021), eaay2627. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics. 
aay2627 
[11] Yoël Forterre, Jan M. Skotheim, Jacques Dumais, and L. Mahadevan. 2005. How 
the Venus flytrap snaps. Nature 433, 7024 (Jan. 2005), 421–425. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nature03185 
[12] Benjamin Gorissen, David Melancon, Nikolaos Vasios, Mehdi Torbati, and Katia 
Bertoldi. 2020. Inflatable soft jumper inspired by shell snapping. Science Robotics 
5, 42 (May 2020), eabb1967. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.abb1967 
[13] Maas Goudswaard, Abel Abraham, Bruna Goveia Da Rocha, Kristina Andersen, 
and Rong-Hao Liang. 2020. FabriClick: Interweaving Pushbuttons into Fabrics 
Using 3D Printing and Digital Embroidery. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM De-
signing Interactive Systems Conference. ACM, Eindhoven Netherlands, 379–393. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395569 
[14] Jianzhe Gu, Yuyu Lin, Qiang Cui, Xiaoqian Li, Jiaji Li, Lingyun Sun, Cheng Yao, 
Fangtian Ying, Guanyun Wang, and Lining Yao. 2022. PneuMesh: Pneumatic-
driven Truss-based Shape Changing System. In CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3491102.3502099 
[15] Jiaming Guo, Xinghan Qiu, Zaoxu Zhang, Lamei Zhang, and Changguo Wang. 
2022. Inflated Pillow with Flexible Bistable Kink: Snap Design and Application. 
AIAA Journal 60, 11 (Nov. 2022), 6500–6505. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J062130 
[16] Liang He, Huaishu Peng, Michelle Lin, Ravikanth Konjeti, François Guimbretière, 
and Jon E. Froehlich. 2019. Ondulé: Designing and Controlling 3D Printable 
Springs. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 739–750. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3332165.3347951 
[17] Sheng-Pei Hu and June-Hao Hou. 2019. Pneu-Multi-Tools: Auto-Folding and 
Multi-Shapes Interface by Pneumatics in Virtual Reality. In The Adjunct Publica-
tion of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 
ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 36–38. https://doi.org/10.1145/3332167.3357107 
[18] Alexandra Ion, Ludwig Wall, Robert Kovacs, and Patrick Baudisch. 2017. Digital 
Mechanical Metamaterials. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Denver Colorado USA, 977–988. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025624 
[19] Yongkang Jiang, Yingtian Li, Ke Liu, Hongying Zhang, Xin Tong, Diansheng 
Chen, Lei Wang, and Jamie Paik. 2023. Ultra-tunable bistable structures for 
universal robotic applications. Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 5 (May 2023), 
101365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2023.101365 
[20] Lishuai Jin, Yueying Yang, Bryan O. Torres Maldonado, Sebastian David Lee, 
Nadia Figueroa, Robert J. Full, and Shu Yang. 2023. Ultrafast, Programmable, and 
Electronics-Free Soft Robots Enabled by Snapping Metacaps. Advanced Intelligent 
Systems 5, 6 (June 2023), 2300039. https://doi.org/10.1002/aisy.202300039 
[21] Haneol Lee and Hugo Rodrigue. 2023. Harnessing the nonlinear properties of 
buckling inflatable tubes for complex robotic behaviors. Materials Today 63 
(March 2023), 59–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2023.02.005 
[22] Nianlong Li, Han-Jong Kim, LuYao Shen, Feng Tian, Teng Han, Xing-Dong Yang, 
and Tek-Jin Nam. 2020. HapLinkage: Prototyping Haptic Proxies for Virtual 
Hand Tools Using Linkage Mechanism. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, Virtual Event USA, 
1261–1274. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379337.3415812 
[23] Hongnan Lin, Liang He, Fangli Song, Yifan Li, Tingyu Cheng, Clement Zheng, 
Wei Wang, and HyunJoo Oh. 2022. FlexHaptics: A Design Method for Passive 
Haptic Inputs Using Planar Compliant Structures. In CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–13. https://doi. 
org/10.1145/3491102.3502113 
[24] Ting-Han Lin, Willa Yunqi Yang, and Ken Nakagaki. 2023. ThrowIO: Actu-
ated TUIs that Facilitate “Throwing and Catching” Spatial Interaction with 
Overhanging Mobile Wheeled Robots. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Hamburg Germany, 1–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581267 
[25] Qiuyu Lu, Jifei Ou, João Wilbert, André Haben, Haipeng Mi, and Hiroshi 
Ishii. 2019. milliMorph – Fluid-Driven Thin Film Shape-Change Materials 
for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 663–672. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347956 
[26] Qiuyu Lu, Haiqing Xu, Yijie Guo, Joey Yu Wang, and Lining Yao. 2023. Fluidic 
Computation Kit: Towards Electronic-free Shape-changing Interfaces. In Proceed-
ings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 
Hamburg Germany, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580783 
[27] Takafumi Morita, Ziyuan Jiang, Kanon Aoyama, Ayato Minaminosono, Yu Kuwa-
jima, Naoki Hosoya, Shingo Maeda, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2023. InflatableMod: 
Untethered and Reconfigurable Inflatable Modules for Tabletop-sized Pneu-
matic Physical Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Hamburg Germany, 1–15. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581353 
[28] Takumi Murayama, Junichi Yamaoka, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2020. Reflatables: 
A Tube-based Reconfigurable Fabrication of Inflatable 3D Objects. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3382904 
[29] Ryuma Niiyama, Young Ah Seong, Yoshihiro Kawahara, and Yasuo Kuniyoshi. 
2021. Blower-Powered Soft Inflatable Joints for Physical Human-Robot Interac-
tion. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 8 (Aug. 2021), 720683. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
frobt.2021.720683 
[30] Yuta Noma, Koya Narumi, Fuminori Okuya, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2020. Pop-
up Print: Rapidly 3D Printing Mechanically Reversible Objects in the Folded State. 
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology. ACM, Virtual Event USA, 58–70. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379337. 
3415853 
[31] Jifei Ou, Mélina Skouras, Nikolaos Vlavianos, Felix Heibeck, Chin-Yi Cheng, 
Jannik Peters, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. aeroMorph - Heat-sealing Inflatable Shape-
change Materials for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, Tokyo Japan, 121–132. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984520 
[32] Dinesh K. Patel, Xiaonan Huang, Yichi Luo, Mrunmayi Mungekar, M. Khalid 
Jawed, Lining Yao, and Carmel Majidi. 2023. Highly Dynamic Bistable Soft Actu-
ator for Reconfigurable Multimodal Soft Robots. Advanced Materials Technologies 
8, 2 (Jan. 2023), 2201259. https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202201259 
[33] Harpreet Sareen, Udayan Umapathi, Patrick Shin, Yasuaki Kakehi, Jifei Ou, Hi-
roshi Ishii, and Pattie Maes. 2017. Printflatables: Printing Human-Scale, Func-
tional and Dynamic Inflatable Objects. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Denver Colorado USA, 3669–3680. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025898 
[34] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO development platform – the pneumatic “Raspberry 
pi” for soft robotics. In Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA. tex.articleno: 479. 
[35] Saiganesh Swaminathan, Michael Rivera, Runchang Kang, Zheng Luo, Kadri Bu-
gra Ozutemiz, and Scott E. Hudson. 2019. Input, Output and Construction Meth-
ods for Custom Fabrication of Room-Scale Deployable Pneumatic Structures. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technolo-
gies 3, 2 (June 2019), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3328933 
[36] Shan-Yuan Teng, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, Chi Wang, Chi-huan Chiang, Da-Yuan Huang, 
Liwei Chan, and Bing-Yu Chen. 2018. PuPoP: Pop-up Prop on Palm for Virtual 
Reality. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology. ACM, Berlin Germany, 5–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3242587.3242628 
[37] Shan-Yuan Teng, Cheng-Lung Lin, Chi-huan Chiang, Tzu-Sheng Kuo, Liwei 
Chan, Da-Yuan Huang, and Bing-Yu Chen. 2019. TilePoP: Tile-type Pop-up 
Prop for Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 639–649. 
SnapInflatables: Designing Inflatables with Snap-through Instability for Responsive Interaction CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347958
 
[38] Guanyun Wang, Yue Yang, Mengyan Guo, Kuangqi Zhu, Zihan Yan, Qiang 
Cui, Zihong Zhou, Junzhe Ji, Jiaji Li, Danli Luo, and others. 2023. ThermoFit: 
Thermoforming smart orthoses via metamaterial structures for body-fitting and 
component-adjusting. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable 
and Ubiquitous Technologies 7, 1 (2023), 1–27. Publisher: ACM New York, NY, 
USA. 
[39] Guanyun Wang, Kuangqi Zhu, Lingchuan Zhou, Mengyan Guo, Haotian Chen, 
Zihan Yan, Deying Pan, Yue Yang, Jiaji Li, Jiang Wu, and others. 2023. PneuFab: 
Designing low-cost 3D-Printed inflatable structures for blow molding artifacts. 
In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–17. 
[40] Junichi Yamaoka, Kazunori Nozawa, Shion Asada, Ryuma Niiyama, Yoshihiro 
Kawahara, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2018. AccordionFab: Fabricating Inflatable 3D 
Objects by Laser Cutting and Welding Multi-Layered Sheets. In Adjunct Proceed-
ings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 
ACM, Berlin Germany, 160–162. https://doi.org/10.1145/3266037.3271636 
[41] Jian Zhang and Chen Li. 2022. Simulation study on performance optimization 
factors of inflatable cushion based on rigidity theory. SN Applied Sciences 4, 2 
(Feb. 2022), 51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-021-04931-8 
[42] Xiaoliang Zhao, Jia Chen, Jinhui Li, Mengmeng Jin, Zihan Deng, Xiaopeng Li, 
Wei Zhang, Minghua Jin, Fangtian Ying, Qi Wang, and Guanyun Wang. 2021. 
MultiPneu: Inflatable Deformation of Multilayered Film Materials. In The Ninth 
International Symposium of Chinese CHI. ACM, Online Hong Kong, 158–161. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3490355.3490517 
[43] Yijun Zhao, Yong Shen, Xiaoqing Wang, Jiacheng Cao, Shang Xia, Fangtian Ying, 
and Guanyun Wang. 2021. PneuMat: Pneumatic Interaction System for Infant 
Sleep Safety Using Shape-Changing Interfaces. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Yokohama Japan, 
1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451597 
[44] Clement Zheng, Jeeeun Kim, Daniel Leithinger, Mark D. Gross, and Ellen Yi-Luen 
Do. 2019. Mechamagnets: Designing and Fabricating Haptic and Functional 
Physical Inputs with Embedded Magnets. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. ACM, Tempe 
Arizona USA, 325–334. https://doi.org/10.1145/3294109.3295622 