du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
1 of 12
SOFT ROBOTS
Haptiknit: Distributed stiffness knitting for 
wearable haptics
Cosima du Pasquier1†*, Lavender Tessmer2†, Ian Scholl 1, Liana Tilton1, Tian Chen3,  
Skylar Tibbits2, Allison Okamura1
Haptic devices typically rely on rigid actuators and bulky power supply systems, limiting wearability. Soft materi-
als improve comfort, but careful distribution of stiffness is required to ground actuation forces and enable load 
transfer to the skin. We present Haptiknit, an approach in which soft, wearable, knit textiles with embedded pneu-
matic actuators enable programmable haptic display. By integrating pneumatic actuators within high-  and low- 
stiffness machine- knit layers, each actuator can transmit 40 newtons in force with a bandwidth of 14.5 hertz. We 
demonstrate the concept with an adjustable sleeve for the forearm coupled to an untethered pneumatic control 
system that conveys a diverse array of social touch signals. We assessed the sleeve’s performance for discrimina-
tive and affective touch in a three- part user study and compared our results with those of prior electromagneti-
cally actuated approaches. Haptiknit improves touch localization compared with vibrotactile stimulation and 
communicates social touch cues with fewer actuators than pneumatic textiles that do not invoke distributed stiff-
ness. The Haptiknit sleeve resulted in similar recognition of social touch gestures compared to a voice-  coil array 
but represented a more portable and comfortable form factor.
INTRODUCTION
The sense of touch is crucial to performing everyday tasks such as 
walking, cooking, and typing. Without touch feedback, known as 
haptics, we lose an enormous component of our interaction with 
the world, in particular with other human beings. Touch is used in 
common social interactions, including soothing, expressing power, 
and playing (1 ). Contrary to the belief that touch merely comple-
ments speech or vision, it can serve as the sole communication 
channel for emotions such as anger, fear, love, and gratitude (2 ). 
Human tactile perception results from the integration of signals 
from diverse skin mechanoreceptors, each specialized in respond-
ing to specific stimuli. For example, Pacinian corpuscles detect 
high- frequency vibrations, Meissner corpuscles respond to the rate 
of skin deformation, Merkel discs focus on spatial features, and 
Ruffini endings are sensitive to skin stretch (3 ,  4). In addition, 
hairy skin, like that on the forearm, houses C tactile (CT) afferents 
activating the insular cortex, a region implicated in emotional pro-
cessing (5,  6). Wearable haptic devices stimulate these mechanore-
ceptors to enhance artificial touch interactions, offering the 
possibility of conveying nuanced and realistic tactile experiences. 
Haptic devices can provide guidance ( 7), convey abstract infor -
mation like emotions or mood (8 ), or provide additional inputs 
in multitasking (9 ). Commercial products like smartphones and 
smartwatches with haptic feedback primarily rely on vibration 
feedback from electromagnetic actuators, which meet practical 
constraints in size, weight, and power. However, vibration feed-
back is difficult to localize because of the large receptive fields of 
Pacinian corpuscles and is not able to realistically convey slowly 
varying touch interactions.
An alternative approach to mobile touch interaction has been 
emerging, inspired by the field of soft robotics. Pneumatic actuators 
can produce quasistatic displacement, shear, and compression to 
communicate information to the wearer (7) and are attractive be-
cause they can rapidly achieve relatively high forces (10,  11). Soft  
actuators also have a stiffness profile close to that of skin (12), pro-
moting a snug fit and comfort. Wu and Culbertson (13) demonstrat-
ed that pneumatic actuators outperformed voice- coil motors in 
continuity and pleasantness, and Shtarbanov et al.’s (14) pilot study 
found that pneumatic indentation was more enjoyable than other 
haptic sensations like suction and voice- coil motors. However, the 
use of exclusively soft materials comes at a cost: Soft materials do 
not typically offer strong grounding, which limits the achievable 
intensity of reaction forces and sensations (15). For example, the 
soft linear pneumatic actuators embedded in the haptic device by 
Kanjanapas et al. (15) produce a maximum force of 0.7 N. To address 
this issue, most pneumatic haptic sleeve designs use large, distrib-
uted actuation to produce generalized sensations of compression 
and stretch (16,  17) but require bulky and rigid hardware for pres-
sure regulation and monitoring.
Recently, a design paradigm has emerged to enable high-  
intensity haptic stimulation while enabling mobility and com-
fort: combining soft pneumatic actuators with knit textiles. The 
modernization of knitting has transformed this millennia- old 
tradition into a state- of- the- art industrial fabrication method. 
Knit textiles hold two main advantages that make them attractive 
in applications driven by human- computer interaction (HCI): 
Their inherent compliance, which allows them to conform to 
doubly curved surfaces without compromising their flexibility, 
and the high- resolution control that flatbed knitting gives the de-
signer over local mechanical properties through localized speci-
fication of the material, pattern, and stitch (18– 20). Like soft 
pneumatic actuators, the capacity of knits to adapt to the wearer’s 
morphology promotes comfort and usability. The potential of 
knits for HCI was described by Luo et  al. ( 21), who presented 
knit sensing interfaces with conductive yarns embedded in 
wearable garments and modulations in stitch and material to 
control pneumatic deformation in a manner similar to classic 
1chaRM laboratory, Stanford, ca, USa. 2Self- assembly laboratory, Massachusetts 
institute of technology, cambridge, Ma, USa. 3a rchitected intelligent Matter labo -
ratory, University of houston, houston, t X, USa.
*c orresponding author. email: cosimad@ stanford. edu
†t hese authors contributed equally to this work.
c opyright © 2024 t he 
a uthors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee a merican 
a ssociation for the 
a dvancement of 
Science. no claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
2 of 12
fiber- reinforced elastomeric enclosures ( 22). Kim et al. ( 23) first 
showcased knitting as a source of haptic feedback with KnitDermis, 
which provides tactile stimulation using shape memory alloy mi-
crosprings integrated in knit channels, and later KnitSkin (24), a 
tubular actuated knit robot that can travel up the arm. Sanchez 
et al. (25) produced thermally actuating textiles that used phase 
change to inflate actuators without an external pressure source. 
However, the full potential of industrial automated knitting for 
haptic applications remains underdeveloped; there are few examples 
that leverage embedded material properties and incorporate com -
ponent assemblies. Existing research used homogeneous knit fabric 
as an armature and a vehicle (26) rather than as a key component 
of the system.
In this work, we propose to use distributed stiffness knitting to 
enable perceivable patterned haptic sensations, an approach we 
call Haptiknit. This concept is embodied in a fully integrated soft  
pneumatic haptic sleeve with distributed stimulation to the skin of 
the forearm (Fig. 1). The sleeve is knitted as one piece, composed 
of two main layers subdivided into six textile sublayers, that 
achieves stiffness variations of more than two orders of magnitude 
by controlling its topology and material. Designed and shaped to 
conform to the forearm, it allows seamless integration of multiple 
sets of soft actuators through the selective use of heat- fusible yarn. 
We characterized the force generation, cycling behavior, and fre-
quency response of the three- dimensional (3D)–printed actuators 
for integration with a Haptiknit sleeve and show that each actua-
tor could achieve forces above 40 N. The sleeve is powered by an 
unencumbering, untethered pneumatic supply system worn on 
the upper arm as a self- contained unit. We validated the ability of 
this sleeve to effectively convey haptic feedback by replicating the 
actuator configuration of another haptic sleeve that used voice-  
coil motors ( 8). We benchmarked our device in a three- part hu-
man user study that showcased the Haptiknit sleeve’s performance 
for discriminative and affective touch. An overview of the fabrica-
tion method and the functioning of Haptiknit can be seen in 
Movie 1.
RESUL TS
Distributed stiffness knitting
To enable high- resolution haptic feedback in our sleeve, we imple-
mented distributed stiffness to control the deformation of soft pneu-
matic actuators with fabric. As shown in Fig. 1, we embedded 
actuators between two layers of fabric, one soft and one stiff, to di-
rect deformation against the skin. Computer numerically controlled 
knitting, the modern form of industrial knitting, enabled us to con-
trol stiffness locally through the choice of textile topology (type 
of knot and type of pattern) and material in one seamless fabric 
construction (18).
We approached stiffness distribution in two ways: by varying the 
knit topology and by selectively adding a heat- fusing agent in high- 
stiffness zones during fabrication. First, we demonstrated how 
modifying only the topology affected stiffness. Figure 2A provides 
force- displacement curves from uniaxial testing in the course direc-
tion for three soft textiles made from the same yarn (Y eoman 540 
Denier 80/20 nylon/Lycra) with varying topology. Fabric A was a 
single- layer ½- gauge rib, fabric B was a double- knit ½- gauge single 
jersey (front) and ¼- gauge single jersey (back), and fabric C was a 
three- layer spacer fabric with double- knit single gauge jersey (front 
and back) and tucks in the midlayer. The differences in topology are 
visible in the microscope images in Fig. 2A. In these examples, stiff-
ness varied by a factor of 8.43, and the textiles exhibited typical hy-
perelastic behavior. Sample videos from the uniaxial tests for fabrics 
A, B, and C are shown in movie S1. Uniaxial testing results of the 
fabrics in the wale direction are shown in fig. S3A.
Second, we selectively embedded thermoplastic fusible yarn in 
the knit, which was melted in a heat- setting postprocessing step 
to produce a global stiffening effect. To create high- stiffness zones 
with sufficient contrast to fully direct the load transmission of 
the soft pneumatic actuators, we tested three different amounts of 
heat- fusible yarn (HMS- Griltech 390 Denier Grilon K85) in the 
course direction: fabric D at 28.3%, fabric F at 44.4%, and fabric G at 
54.2% of the total fabric weight, respectively. We used the same base 
fabric knit and the same yarn as in the low- stiffness fabrics. Results 
Fig. 1. Haptiknit system overview. (A) a haptiknit- powered sleeve is composed of multiple knit layers of distributed stiffness and embedded pneumatic actuators; with 
eight actuators and an untethered controller, it provides multimodal haptic signals. t he (B) uninflated and (C) inflated states of the sleeve are shown schematically, in the 
sleeve, and outside the sleeve. t he sleeve is knit in a single piece (D) and has applications, for example, in navigation (E).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
3 of 12
presented in Fig. 2B show that the incremental increase in heat- 
fusible yarn concentration produced a maximum stiffening factor of 
4.9, resulting in an almost 400- fold difference from the softest to the 
stiffest textile, as indicated by the effective stiffnesses in Fig. 2D. As 
the amount of heat- fusible fiber doubled and then tripled, more 
bubbles from hardened resin appeared in the microscopy images (to 
the right of the graph in Fig. 2B), and the material exhibited increas-
ingly plastic behavior. Because of comfort considerations, we used 
only fabric D in the sleeve, given that testing showed that its stiffness 
was sufficient for load transmission. As shown in Fig. 2C, the fabric 
transitioned from the typical hyperelastic response of a textile to a 
plastic response before and after heat setting, with a stiffening factor 
of 19.6. Sample videos from the uniaxial tests for fabrics D, E, and F 
are shown in movie S2. Uniaxial testing results for the fabrics in the 
wale direction are shown in fig. S3B.
Prototype fabrication and characterization
Our haptic sleeve prototype shown in Figs. 1 and 3 contained three 
integrated components: the sleeve, the actuators, and the air supply 
system. Each component was designed and characterized priori-
tizing comfort, discernability of haptic feedback, and portability.
Wearable knit haptic sleeve
We distinguished haptic feedback zones from inert zones in the 
knit sleeve by adjusting the textile stiffness through a combina-
tion of material and stitch type variations and heat treatment. 
Low- stiffness regions were knit using elastic yarns (fabrics A, B, 
and C), whereas high- stiffness regions resulted from heat setting 
specific areas with thermoplastic fibers (fabric D). The primary 
design requirement of the knit sleeve 
was to transfer actuator forces onto the 
skin for a wide range of arm sizes. The 
design also had to accommodate the 
assembly and installation of pneumatic 
actuators and the routing of tubes. This 
was achieved with compartments, chan-
nels, and a multilayer surface topology. 
We include a detailed knitting file in the 
Supplementary Materials.
The knit sleeve is organized into two 
major layers: an inner layer in contact 
with the skin and an outer layer within 
which the actuators are inserted and tub-
ing is routed. These two layers are each 
composed of three individual sublayers 
(six sublayers in total). The sublayers 
each contain specific configurations of 
high-  and low- stiffness regions as shown 
in Fig. 3. Low- stiffness fabric regions (A, 
B, and C) have three functions. First, the 
fabric A regions in contact with the in-
flatable areas of the actuators (in dark 
blue in Figs. 2 and 3) expand and con-
tract with pneumatic force. Second, two 
long fabric B regions on each side of the 
actuators (in gray in Figs. 2 and 3) allow 
for easy routing of the hoses from actua-
tors to the air supply system. Third, nar-
row transverse elastic fabric C regions 
are situated between each actuator (in 
light blue in Figs. 2 and 3), allowing the 
entire system to flex, twist, and adapt 
to each user’s unique body shape. We 
achieved this by modifying the knit to-
pology only, using the same yarn for 
all three regions. The arrangement of 
Movie 1. Overview of design, fabrication, and performance of Haptiknit.
Fig. 2. Stiffness changes using topology variation and bonding fibers. Force- displacement curves in uniaxial test-
ing (course direction) for (A) low- stiffness fabrics, where stiffness variation is achieved by changing the topology, and 
(B) high- stiffness fabrics, where stiffness change is achieved by adding thermoplastic fiber. a microscopic view with 
a magnification of 50 (scale bar in picture) is shown for each fabric. (C) behavior of fabric D before and after heat set-
ting. t he effective stiffness E is given for both curves, and the linear regression curves used to estimate the effective 
stiffnesses are marked with a dotted gray line. (D) effective stiffnesses of all materials in n/mm. t he stiffest material 
(fabric G) is 400 times stiffer than the softest material (fabric a ).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
4 of 12
high- stiffness regions (fabric D) was designed to maintain cir -
cumferential continuity of high- stiffness material, which con-
centrates the actuation forces onto the deformable areas while 
constraining the assembly against the body. We chose fabric D 
over fabrics E and F for its balance of target force transmission 
and user comfort.
The Velcro straps for the sleeve were sized to accommodate the 
fifth percentile of women’s forearm circumference (smallest fit) and 
the 95th percentile of men’s forearm circumference (largest fit) (27). 
One Velcro strap was attached to each actuator region, enabling 
each of the four actuator pairs to be tightened individually to main-
tain close skin contact in a wide variety of different arm shapes. The 
placement of Velcro straps also supported the stiffness continuity 
around the arm and was easily manipulated by the device wearer 
during donning and doffing.
Soft 3D- printed actuators
Thanks to 3D printing, we can fabricate custom actuator shapes that 
can be seamlessly integrated into a textile. We fabricated our soft  
actuators using an SLA 3D printer (Formlabs Form 3). As shown in 
Fig. 4C, the actuators had a diameter of 25 mm and were placed on 
the dorsal side of the forearm in a two- by- four grid, spaced 37 mm 
apart center to center in the proximal- distal axis and 50 mm in the 
transverse axis (Fig. 3). These dimensions match those of the sleeve 
reported by Salvato et al. (8), allowing us to use their social touch 
gesture patterns in our user study. Previous research has shown that 
this layout density effectively communicates continuous motion 
(28) and exceeds the two- point discrimination threshold for the 
lower dorsal arm (8,  29). A denser array would add complexity with-
out enhancing the haptic experience. The forearm’s smooth, consis-
tent curvature and even distribution of mechanoreceptors make it 
ideal for delivering uniform haptic feedback. Each actuator is indi-
vidually addressable.
We determined the best material type and actuator thickness by 
characterizing force responses under two conditions: blocked force 
of a single actuator as a standalone or between two layers of fabric 
(one soft, fabric B; and one stiff, fabric D; as shown in fig. S5, A and 
B) to differentiate the actuators’ performances in free space and 
embedded in a distributed stiffness textile. We chose to investigate 
force because displacement depends on the user’s skin elasticity and 
thus would vary across users. We tested two materials from Form-
labs, Elastic 50A and Flexible 80A, and three wall thicknesses, 1.0, 
1.5, and 2.0 mm, a total of six variations. The force testing procedure 
is detailed in Materials and Methods. We show the mean results in 
Fig. 4D.
The results in Fig. 4D indicate that all actuator variations achieved 
at least 35 N at the maximum pressure of 230 kPa. This is more than 
triple the values obtained by recent work by Jumet et al. (7) that also 
used 25- mm- diameter soft pneumatic actuators in a textile sleeve. 
In the cases where the force is constrained by the stiff and soft textile 
layers (dashed lines in Fig. 4D), the forces achieved were equal to or 
very similar to those in the unconstrained tests. The higher forces 
observed in the constrained tests are due to the fabric between the 
actuator and sensor, which increased the contact area, in particular 
at lower pressures. This is illustrated with finite element analysis of 
the 2- mm Elastic 50A and Flexible 50A actuators in fig. S4.
The higher elasticity of Elastic 50A actuators increases their de-
formation potential. This directly increases the contact surface with 
the force sensor, leading to consistently higher values. Thinner ac-
tuators achieved greater forces for a similar reason. However, Elastic 
50A actuators of 1.5 mm and below had a failure rate of 25%, and 
1- mm- thick Flexible 80A actuators had a failure rate of 50%. We 
chose the pressure to limit force transmission at values under 30 N 
for comfort and safety concerns. To prioritize system robustness and 
durability, we used actuators printed with Elastic 50A and a 2- mm 
wall thickness, achieving maximum forces of 24 N at the standard 
system pressure (175 kPa). We conducted cyclical tests up to 100 
cycles on the final actuator configuration for both setups to ensure 
consistent performance over time, avoiding issues like material fa-
tigue or hysteresis. As shown in Fig. 4E, the actuators maintained 
consistent performance. The fabric notably affected force transmis-
sion at high (200 kPa) and low (150 kPa) pressures, with slight de-
formation at high pressure and dampened deformation at low 
pressure. At the standard pressure (175 kPa), actuator performance 
remained stable.
Fig. 3. Haptiknit sleeve construction overview. t he 3D view shows the sleeve cross section with circumferential continuity of stiff material integrated with Velcro clo -
sures. t he materials and knit structures are detailed with consistent color coding throughout the text: Fabrics a, b , and c have the same material and topological varia-
tions; fabric D was stiffened using heat- fusible yarn. t he 2D view depicts the unrolled sleeve including the locations of the integrated actuators and pneumatic hoses. 
a lthough pairs of actuators are connected by a neck for assembly purposes, each actuator is controlled separately.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
5 of 12
We characterized the frequency response and bandwidth of the 
final actuator configuration (Fig. 5). The −3 dB line in Fig. 4F indi-
cates a reduction of the signal power by 50%, and so the bandwidth, 
and is reached at frequencies of 14.5 Hz. This means that forces per-
ceived as skin indentation can be varied at frequencies higher than 
the human volitional movement bandwidth (~10 Hz), which im-
plies that the actuators can induce haptic sensations that feel natural.
Portable pneumatic system for soft haptics
Portability is crucial for the ambulatory potential of wearable de-
vices and so was a priority in our work. To make the development 
of untethered soft robots more accessible, Shtarbanov (30) recently 
introduced FlowIO, an open- source miniature pneumatic supply 
system. We developed a customized version of their setup, called 
AirPort 1.0, to power the actuators, with modifications to address 
our specific needs (see details in Materials and Methods).
The final system, shown in fig. S1, weighs 440 g and provides a 
bistable air supply, where each port can switch independently be-
tween the inflation channel supplied by the positive pressure pump 
and the deflation channel connected to the vacuum pump. Thus, 
there are four possible states for each port: inflating, holding pres-
sure, deflating with vacuum, and ambient pressure.
AirPort 1.0 compares favorably to other portable pneumatic sys-
tems. Programmable Air, the system introduced by Shrivastava 
(31), has a similar form factor but only three output ports and half 
the pressure range. Although AirPort has a pressure range five 
times smaller than that of Kim et  al.’s device ( 32), it offers eight 
ports instead of one, can pull vacuum, and is six times lighter. It can 
be comfortably worn around the upper arm for prolonged periods 
of time using a strap.
User study
We performed a three- part user study with 32 participants to test 
the sleeve in three scenarios for both affective and discriminative 
touch (33). The tests parallel those performed using previous haptic 
sleeves using voice- coil motors and/or vibration motors (28). The 
study consisted of a maximum pressure calibration step, three tests, 
and a postexperiment assessment. In calibration, we determined the 
maximum pressure based on each participant’s preference. In the 
first test, participants estimated the location of individual actuators 
(discriminative touch). In the second test, participants experienced 
and rated nine stroking patterns (affective touch). In the third test, 
participants interpreted and rated six social touch gestures provided 
by the sleeve (affective touch). The postexperiment assessment in-
cluded an open- ended discussion, during which participants pro-
vided five ratings on perceived task accuracy and sleeve design. 
Details of the calibration and testing procedure are given in Materi-
als and Methods.
Individual actuator localization
We evaluated actuator localization accuracy to assess the feasibility 
of our approach, as opposed to vibration, for creating a tactile dis-
play on the forearm. We inflated each actuator to the calibrated 
maximum pressure three times in random order and asked the par-
ticipants to guess which actuator had been inflated, using the 1 to 8 
location numbering shown in Figs. 3 and 5.
Figure 5 shows the localization performance distribution by ac-
tuator. We summed the guesses across all participants and runs for 
when a specific actuator was inflated. The overall accuracy across 
the experiment was 69%, more than 5.5 times chance. In every in-
stance, the correct actuator was consistently the top choice, and the 
Fig. 4. Soft pneumatic actuator geometry and characterization results. (A) Uninflated actuator with section view at the dotted line. (B) i nflated actuator as used to 
measure blocked force between the rest state and the inflated state. (C) Section view of uninflated actuator as indicated in ( a ), including dimensions. (D) blocked force 
versus pressure for N  = 4 actuators. F indicates Flexible 80a, and e indicates elastic 50a, followed by the thickness in mm. Dashed lines indicate that the actuators were 
tested between a stiff and a soft fabric layer; full lines indicate that they were tested in blocked force with an acrylic plate. (E) Force cycling behavior of the final actuator 
(elastic 50a, 2 mm), N  = 3. (F) a ctuator frequency response magnitude in force; the bandwidth (−3 db magnitude) is marked with black dashed lines, N = 3; averages and 
SDs are in tables S3 and S4.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
6 of 12
second highest scoring actuator location was directly adjacent and 
in the same row. The side of the forearm, inner (#5 to 8) or outer (#1 
to 4) forearm, was correctly guessed in 98% of the cases. In addition, 
we observed that the actuation stimuli on the inner side of the fore-
arm were predicted correctly in 76% of the cases, compared with 63% 
on the outer side of the forearm.
Perception of stroking patterns
To replicate a stroking sensation, we inflated actuators 5 through 8 
(as shown in Fig. 5) in sequential order, varying the duration of and 
delay between each actuation. Delays were defined as the percentage 
of the inflation duration after which the next actuator in the stroke 
started to inflate. After each of nine stroking patterns was played, 
participants were asked to rate their perceived continuity using an 
8- point Likert scale, where 0  =  discrete and 7  =  continuous, and 
pleasantness using a 15- point Likert scale, where −7 = very unpleas -
ant, 0 = neutral, and +7 = very pleasant.
Figure 6A shows the average continuity ratings normalized to 
the same 1- to- 7 scale used by Culbertson et  al. (4) and their SDs 
sorted by duration and delay. Rated continuity decreased with infla-
tion duration when delay was held constant and decreased with de-
lay when the duration was held constant.
Similarly, Fig. 6B shows the average pleasantness ratings and 
their SDs organized by pulse width and delay. All ratings were greater 
than or equal to zero on average, implying that no stroke was consis-
tently perceived as unpleasant. The pattern with the shortest infla-
tion duration and largest delay was perceived as the most pleasant, 
whereas increasing the duration generally lowered the pleasantness. 
For short inflation durations of 200 ms, increasing the delay raised 
pleasantness; for longer inflation durations, it showed the opposite 
effect and decreased pleasantness.
Recognition and perception of social touch gestures
Our third and final test measured user recognition of six common 
social touch “gestures” that were previously studied and mapped 
to the two- by- four actuator layout by Salvato et al. (8): attention, 
gratitude, happiness, calming, love, and sadness. Previous studies 
showed that these emotions can be signaled through nonverbal 
communication (2, 34, 35).
The confusion matrix shown in Fig. 6C displays the aggregated 
top choices across all participants and runs for each executed ges-
ture, normalized row- wise. Whenever the percentages provided by 
the participant created a tie for top choice, the point for the top 
choice was distributed proportionally among the gestures that shared 
the highest attributed percentage. The total classification accuracy 
was 36%, 2.2 times the rate of chance. Attention and happiness ges-
tures were guessed correctly at more than three times the rate of 
chance, with the primary confusion being between these two. Grati-
tude and sadness were guessed correctly at more than 1.6 times the 
rate of chance and were also the top choice for their respective sce-
nario. The calming and love gestures exhibited higher levels of con-
fusion, approaching chance levels. This confusion led to participant 
selection of alternative gestures, with attention replacing calming 
and gratitude taking the place of love as the top choices, respectively.
1234
5678
1 2345678
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
1 2345678
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
12345678
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
1234567 8
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
12345678
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
1
12345678
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
2
12345678
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
3
1234567 8
Actuator
0
20
40
60
80Count
4
5678
Fig. 5. Actuator localization accuracy results. l ocalization results for N  = 32 participants for each of the eight actuator locations; the graph counts indicate how many 
times the location was chosen across all participants and runs; each actuator location was played three times in a randomized order.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
7 of 12
The recall for a played gesture is the true positive rate, defined as 
the percentage of how often a gesture was correctly guessed when 
presented. All of our gestures had recall values 9 to 16% lower than 
those in the confusion matrix presented in Fig. 6 of Salvato et al. (8), 
except for happiness (55% recall in ours compared with 45%). A 
row- wise Bhattacharyya coefficient calculation (36) between our re-
sults and theirs, serving as an indicator of the overlap between two 
distributions, revealed high similarities of 96, 89, 96, 95, 92, and 97% 
by row and gesture, respectively.
We also asked participants to rate the perceived valence, arousal, 
and authenticity of each gesture on Likert scales from 1 to 9. Happi-
ness received the highest average valence rating of 6.25 and sadness 
the lowest, 4.66. Happiness also had the highest average arousal rat-
ing of 7.31, more than 1.5 points greater than any of the other ren-
dered gestures. Gratitude had the highest average authenticity rating 
of 6.88 and happiness had the lowest, 3.41.
Postexperiment ratings
After the experiments, participants were asked to self- assess their 
performance in the localization and gesture recognition tests. Par -
ticipants were also asked to rate the ease of donning, comfort, and 
aesthetics of the Haptiknit sleeve on a Likert scale from 0 = very bad 
to 10 = very good.
Participants’ self- assessment, normalized to a 10- point scale, 
matched their actual accuracy for both the localization task and 
gesture task (Fig. 7A). The gesture task had lower accuracy, with a 
median normalized rating of 4.4 compared with 6.9 of the localiza-
tion task.
In the postexperiment discussion, participants described the 
importance of actuation frequency when assessing social touch. 
Participant 17 (P17) said the following: “Sadness and gratitude I 
thought of as a slower movement. Attention and happiness was a 
faster movement. But the nuances between those were more diffi-
cult. Love was less defined for me. ” Applied force was also men-
tioned as a determining factor by P31: “The lighter [patterns] felt 
like gratitude or attention. The deeper and more intense [patterns] 
felt like love, calming, or sadness. ” Another factor was the location 
of actuation on the arm, as noted by P31: “Some of the gestures 
were on one side of the arm and some were on both sides. The ones 
that were on both sides I interpreted as more intimate or more 
intense. ”
The results from the Likert scale in Fig. 7B indicated median 
values of 9 for ease of donning, 8 for comfort, and 7 for aesthetics. 
Only the aesthetics rating showed mean variations of more than 
one point in relation with participants’ previous experience using 
human- machine interactive devices. The median aesthetic ratings 
varied from 6 for individuals with no experience to 7 for those 
with limited or moderate experience and further increased to 
8.5 for individuals with extensive experience. Participant feed-
back confirmed that key design features, such as selected low-
stiffness regions and the closing mechanism of the sleeve, enable 
easy donning, comfortable wear, and pleasant aesthetics, espe-
cially among participants with previous experience testing haptic 
devices.
Fig. 6. Stroking ratings and social touch gesture top choice results. (A) continuity and (B) pleasantness ratings for three stroke durations and three delays. (C) normal-
ized gesture top choice results for the six emotions communicated with the sleeve. h ighest values for participant top choice for each rendered gesture are outlined in 
gold, the scale on the right represents how many participants guessed correctly (in %), and the bars show the SDs from the mean participant response; N = 32.
01234567891 0
Normalized Score (0-10)
Location Task Self-Assessment
Location Task Actual Accuracy
Gesture Task Self-Assessment
Gesture Task Actual Accuracy
0123456789 10
Rating (0-10)
Ease of Donning
Comfort
Aesthetics
B
A
Fig. 7. User study postexperiment ratings. Postexperiment ratings of (A) loca-
tion and gesture task accuracy (self- assessed and measured) and (B) self- assessed 
qualitative description of the sleeve; the data are expressed as a whisker- plot dia-
gram: t he box represents the interquartile ranges, whereas the means are indicated 
by yellow lines; the dashed lines extend out to the lower and upper quartiles; outli-
ers are indicated with yellow crosses.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
8 of 12
DISCUSSION
Distributed stiffness
In our examination of distributed stiffness, we demonstrated the 
stiffness range attainable through topology variation and material 
variation (via inclusion of thermoplastic yarn). The stiffness range 
observed for our soft materials (0.122 to 1.03 N/mm) was compa-
rable to that reported by Singal et al. (37) (0.003 to 0.223 N/mm). 
The order- of- magnitude difference can be attributed to the use of 
only one knit layer in their fabric samples rather than two in fabrics 
B and C (see table S2). On the other hand, the stiffness range ob-
served for our stiffer materials (9.78 to 48.1 N/mm) was two orders 
of magnitude higher than those for our and Singal et  al.’s stiffest 
unreinforced fabrics.
In our actuator characterization, we showed that constraining 
the pneumatic actuators with fabric B (effective stiffness 0.603 N/
mm) had only a negligible effect on load transmission and deforma-
tion, whereas fabric D (effective stiffness 9.78 N/mm) essentially 
caused a “blocked force” response in that direction. We conclude 
that to control and direct the load transmission of our actuators ef-
fectively, we need a stiffness asymmetry of roughly one order of 
magnitude. A single, homogeneous fabric could not simultaneously 
provide haptic feedback accurately and anchor the actuators effec-
tively. An equally important consideration is that the inclusion of 
the heat- fusible yarn essentially transforms the fabric stretch re-
sponse from that of tangled yarn to a monolithic material. Con-
sequently, the fabric retains the ability to bend and conform 
comfortably to the arm, but does not stretch, and effectively blocks 
any deformation caused by the actuators.
Although one could replicate our distributed stiffness method 
by assembling, for example, a polymer and a fabric with the appro-
priate stiffnesses, the design and fabrication processes would be 
challenging, especially for a wearable device. In contrast, our mul-
tilayer knit can deliver the required level 
of asymmetric response through one-  
shot manufacturing and a single post-
processing step, considerably simplifying 
the entire procedure. It also allows for 
building further complexity into a design 
without scaling the fabrication effort, 
which opens possibilities to adapt the 
design to other more complex body parts 
(joints for example) or entirely differ -
ent applications.
Haptiknit sleeve prototype
The implementation of the haptic sleeve 
in our user studies supports the viability 
of using soft pneumatic actuators and 
distributed stiffness knitting in wearable 
haptic devices for both affective and dis-
criminative touch. Although haptic sensa-
tions might differ from those caused 
by vibration or voice- coil motors, we 
have shown that they are equally or more 
pleasant, can provide the feeling of con-
tinuous motion, and are more successful 
in communicating granular informa-
tion. This motivates other applications re-
quiring detailed haptic feedback, such as 
teleoperation (Fig. 8A), sensory remapping (Fig. 8B), navigation 
(Fig. 8C), or training movement or communication between players on 
a team (Fig. 8D).
In addition to providing haptic stimuli, other features of the 
sleeve and Airport 1.0 are noteworthy. Our pneumatic supply sys-
tem controls eight individual actuators and a force transmission 
range of 40 N; this is distinguished from the prior work shown in 
table S1. Whereas other user studies have used pneumatic supply 
systems that require additional packaging on the back or the waist, 
our system is battery powered and untethered and can be worn on 
the arm alone. Participant feedback in the postexperiment discus-
sion confirmed that combining distributed stiffness knitting with 
soft actuators and Velcro straps was comfortable and easy to use. In 
contrast with previous haptic sleeves, our device can thus be worn 
for prolonged periods of time without affecting the participant’s 
dexterity or mobility. In contrast, the voice- coil system of Salvato 
et  al. (8) was heavier and prone to overheating because of quasi-
static driving of the electromagnetic actuators, thus requiring longer 
rest periods during user testing. These results demonstrate the po-
tential of combining distributed stiffness knits with soft pneumatic 
actuators, opening avenues for HCI applications requiring distrib-
uted haptic feedback with comfort and portability.
User study
In this section, we first discuss the results from each part of the user 
study individually. Then, we discuss the implications of our ap-
proach in the wider context of wearable haptic devices.
Localization
Untrained participants were able to predict actuation location with a 
mean of 69% accuracy compared with a chance value of 12.5% (one 
in eight actuactors). This indicates that the layout of the actuator grid 
in our sleeve allows participants to discern haptic information 
Fig. 8. Potential applications for distributed stiffness haptics. (A) Realistic feedback in mixed reality and during 
teleoperation. (B) Sensory remapping, for example, for an instrumented prosthetic arm. (C) navigation, for example, 
to provide direction guidance that does not obstruct users from seeing and hearing their environment. (D) Guidance 
and communication during sports.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
9 of 12
accurately. We believe the selected sparseness of the actuators was 
a good compromise between making them distinguishable and 
enabling a continuous stroke as described above. Compared with 
Jumet et al. (7), who also demonstrated a pneumatic textile sleeve, 
we achieved communication of eight cues with eight actuators, 
outperforming their method that conveyed only four cues with 
12 actuators.
The radial nerve wraps around the elbow and then lies on the 
inner forearm until reaching the index finger and thumb. This re-
sults in higher sensitivity on the inner than the outer forearm (38). 
Correspondingly, our actuators 5 to 8, which are placed on the inner 
arm, achieve higher average accuracy values. Our results also align 
with prior work suggesting that haptic actuation in proximity to 
body landmarks (also known as anchor points), like the elbow and 
actuator 4 in our setup, is more easily distinguishable (28, 39). Even 
for actuators with lower accuracy values (actuators 2 and 3 for ex-
ample), actuator locations were only confused with their direct 
neighbors. In similar actuator localization studies that used vibra-
tion stimuli, participants typically achieved accuracy ranging from 
35 to 55% on the forearm (28). In contrast, our study reports a 
higher accuracy range of 44 to 89%. Vibrotactile actuators stimulate 
the Pacinian corpuscles, which have large receptive fields, and create 
vibration waves that propagate through the skin (39,  40), causing a 
larger area of mechanoreceptors to be activated; these characteris-
tics make vibration actuator locations harder to discern. We con-
clude that our quasistatic displacement- based haptic approach is 
more successful for discriminative touch and thus better suited for 
applications such as a haptic display for communication.
Stroking patterns
Previous literature indicates that stroking motions between 1 and 
10 cm/s are most pleasant, because of the response of CT afferents (6). 
However, our slowest stroking pattern, which falls within this speed 
range (600 ms and 50% delay is equivalent to 7.4 cm/s), was rated 
lower by more than 1.25 points in pleasantness compared with the 
highest rated stroke at 13.5 cm/s (200 ms and 50% delay), as shown 
in Fig 6. Our highest speed stroke at 40.3 cm/s for 200 ms and 12.5% 
delay also received a continuity rating almost three points higher 
than that for the slowest one. This is likely due to the discrete nature 
of our actuation, both spatially and in intensity. Spatially, our stroke 
is a series of individual contacts, not a continuous stroke as in CT 
afferent studies ( 6). For intensity, our pneumatic system is open- 
loop and targets single pressure values; an actuator can only be on or 
off, albeit at different intensities (stroke depths) and for different pe-
riods of time. We found that stroking patterns of longer duration 
and delays create a crawling, rather than stroking, sensation along 
the forearm, where each indentation is easily distinguishable. This 
could indicate that displacement, in contrast with vibrations, does 
not activate CT afferents. It is also possible that vibrations generally 
feel more continuous because they excite a larger portion of the skin 
around the actuator rather than localized deformation.
Despite this observed difference, no stroking pattern was consis-
tently rated as unpleasant. In contrast, Culbertson et al. (4) reported 
negative pleasantness ratings for a similar device using voice- coil 
actuators for strokes of 200 ms and delays of 12.5% or 50%. We at-
tribute the higher pleasantness of our device to the elasticity and 
comfort of the knit sleeve and soft actuators, in contrast with the 
rigid and perhaps more robotic feel of voice- coil actuators. We also 
observed that the sleeve’s actuator grid is dense enough to create 
stroking sensations with middling continuity ratings, as shown in 
Fig. 6A. The shortest inflation duration of 200 ms and delay of 12.5% 
received a continuity rating greater than 5 on the 7- point Lik-
ert scale.
Social touch gestures
The confusion matrix obtained for the six touch gestures is similar 
to that in Salvato et al., whose actuator grid dimensions and gesture 
patterns we replicated (8): All Bhattacharyya similarity coefficients 
for both studies were higher than 89%. However, we achieved an 
overall lower accuracy: 36% compared with 45%. We believe that 
this is again due to the nature of our pneumatic control system. In 
Salvato et al., each actuator stroke could be controlled independent-
ly to a specific indentation force. Our current control system only 
defines whether one or multiple actuators are on or off and the pres-
sure they initially inflate to.
Despite differences in actuation approach, our social touch iden-
tification results generally align with those of Salvato et  al.: Our 
sleeve can successfully communicate human emotions, as shown in 
the recall of attention and happiness. These two gestures entailed 
distinguishable fast actuation patterns, such as a double tap for 
attention or a series of short and sharp indentations across the 
forearm for happiness. Arousal and valence also play a role in 
how effectively an emotion was communicated. Happiness, a high- 
accuracy gesture, achieved the highest scores, whereas sadness, a low- 
accuracy gesture, achieved the lowest. In addition, the gestures for 
calming and love were characterized by more complex and slow ac-
tuation patterns, including stroking or squeezing, and test partici-
pants reported they were generally less well defined even when 
given their meaning. As previously observed by Bann and Bryson 
(41), cultural background and age might also affect how these spe-
cific emotions are communicated and understood. Our haptic sleeve 
might be better suited to transmit well- defined and widely accepted 
social touch gestures. Gratitude, for example, was rated as the most 
realistic. It consisted of a single squeeze on the lower forearm, like 
that of a hand.
Conclusion
Our study demonstrates the potential of combining distributed stiff-
ness knits with soft pneumatic actuators, offering an original ap-
proach for designing wearable haptic devices with enhanced comfort 
and portability. The multilayer knits enable effective control over 
load transmission and deformation in pneumatic actuators, simpli-
fying the design and fabrication processes compared with alterna-
tive methods.
The Haptiknit sleeve prototype supports the feasibility of using 
soft pneumatic actuators and distributed stiffness knitting for affec-
tive and discriminative touch in wearable haptic devices. The posi-
tive participant feedback on comfort and ease of use underscores 
the practicality of the proposed approach for long- term wear. The 
prototype also distinguishes itself by incorporating an untethered 
pneumatic system with individual actuator control, a wide force 
transmission range, and the ability to be worn for prolonged periods 
without hindering dexterity or mobility. Although the user study 
revealed discrepancies in user preferences for stroking patterns 
compared with existing literature, the overall pleasantness of haptic 
sensations, coupled with successful actuator localization and social- 
touch gesture communication, supports the efficacy of our approach.
Our research introduces an innovative framework for the design 
and implementation of wearable haptic devices, paving the way 
for enhanced HCI applications. The combination of distributed 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
10 of 12
stiffness knits and soft pneumatic actuators offers a promising ave-
nue for the development of comfortable, portable, and versatile hap-
tic interfaces with diverse applications in the fields of communication, 
interaction, and beyond.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Distributed stiffness fabric characterization
Homogeneous swatches were knitted using the specifications listed 
in table S2. Each refers to a specific region of the sleeve prototype. 
We began by obtaining optical microscopy images (Nikon Eclipse 
MA200) with a magnification of 50 from these textile swatches be-
fore mechanical testing.
We then adapted the ASTM D4694- 96 Standard (42) to charac-
terize the tensile properties of the different fabrics. We used a uni-
versal testing machine (Instron 68SC- 2) with tensile grips to apply 
tension. To prepare the samples, we laser cut rectangular patches of 
size 80 mm by 40 mm using a carbon dioxide (CO 2) laser engraver 
(Trotec Speedy 360) from each textile swatch. Three patches were 
cut in each course direction as indicated by the orientation of the 
longer edge. From these, we clamped both the top and the bottom 
edges with polymethyl methacrylate clamps as shown in fig. S2 so 
that the gauge area was 40 mm by 40 mm. Considering that some 
yarns are viscoelastic, we ensured a constant displacement rate of 
1 mm/s. Maximum strain was set to 200%. We captured the deforma-
tion with a digital video camera to further understand the damage 
mechanisms. We calculated the effective stiffness of the fabrics by 
fitting a line of best fit to 5% strain using the following equation
where xi is the strain in % and yi is the force in N.
AirPort 1.0 specifications
AirPort 1.0 was adapted from the open- source design known as 
FlowIO by Shtarbanov et al. (30). First, we increased the number of 
output valves from five to eight to control each actuator in the sleeve 
independently. Second, we also changed the pumps and used the 
Skoocom SC3802PM positive pressure pump from FlowIO’s large- 
sized pump module and a Skoocom SC1804PM vacuum pump from 
the medium- sized module to obtain the pressure range needed for 
the soft pneumatic actuators. Third, we removed the block on the 
second common air channel of FlowIO’s SMC S070 solenoid valves.
Actuator characterization test setup
Force was measured with a Nano 17 sensor (from ATI Industrial 
Automation). We characterized actuators using two soft materials 
(Elastic 50A and Flexible 80A resins from Formlabs, where 50A and 
80A are the shore hardness) and three bellow thicknesses (1.0, 1.5, 
and 2.0 mm). The force test setups are shown in fig. S5 (A and B). 
Each parameter combination was tested N  = 4 times using new ac-
tuators each time. See table S3 for means and SDs.
The cycling behavior of actuators was tested for the final actuator 
configuration (Elastic 50A at a 2- mm thickness) using the same test 
setup as above (fig. S5, A and B). N = 3 actuators were tested at three 
pressures (150, 175, and 200 kPa) each and for each test setup (total 
of nine actuators per setup). In one cycle, pressure was ramped up to 
the target value and held for 1 s, then the actuator was deflated to 
atmospheric pressure and held again for 1 s. Actuators were tested 
for 100 cycles. See table S3 for means and SDs.
The frequency response and bandwidth were measured N  =  3 
times in the unconstrained setups (no fabric, as shown in Fig. 2A) 
using a square- wave pneumatic input at the nominal system pres-
sure of 185 kPa. We induced a frequency sweep starting at 1 Hz with 
increments of a factor of 1.2. We measured the force response F, 
computing each magnitude in dB 20 ⋅ F
Fmax
. Forces were measured up 
to 80 Hz, nearing the solenoid valves’ switching delay limit (see fig. 
S6 for time versus pressure response). The frequency- dependent 
force response is influenced by hardware like pumps and valves. Pri-
oritizing wearability over high- frequency performance, we tested 
the system’s limits and opted not to use larger components.
Design and fabrication of the knit sleeve
The sleeve was designed in the Create+ software interface and fabri-
cated on a STOLL CMS 330 HP- W TT Sport industrial flatbed knit-
ting machine. All knitting layers were fabricated simultaneously in a 
single seamless textile. As shown in the assembly process in fig. S7, 
when heat was applied in postprocessing, the layers bonded and 
stiffened.
The sleeve assembly began by placing four pairs of soft actuators 
inside designated compartments within the sleeve. Once positioned, 
the entire sleeve was placed in an oven and heated to 115.5°C for 
10 min. After heating, a die shaped to match the dimensions and posi-
tioning of the actuators was pressed down on the compartments for 
45 s to secure the actuators in place. The sleeve was then placed onto 
a conical tube, shaped roughly like a forearm, to form its structure. 
After cooling, Velcro straps were attached at the level of the actuator 
compartments, ensuring a snug fit to the skin and enabling easy 
donning and removal of the sleeve (see fig. S7 for a visual guide to 
the steps).
User study design
Participants were recruited via university email lists, with a focus on 
ensuring a diverse range of responses across age and gender. Par -
ticipants provided informed consent, and the protocol received ap-
proval from the Stanford University Institutional Review Board. 
Thirty- two participants (18 males, 13 females, and 1 who preferred 
not to answer; ages 18 to 58 years) took part in the study. Twenty- 
five participants reported that they were right- handed, six left- 
handed, and one ambidextrous. Ten of the participants had extensive 
prior experience with haptic devices, 5 moderate, 10 limited, and 7 
had no experience. None of the participants reported cognitive or 
sensory impairments. The ethnicity information of the participants 
was not collected at the time of the study.
Participants wore the sleeve on their right forearm with the ac-
tuators located on the dorsal side. During the experiment, partici-
pants rested on their elbow with the forearm and sleeve held freely 
in the air, hidden by a box as shown in fig. S8. They wore active 
noise- canceling headphones playing white noise. The modes of ac-
tuation were controlled by the experimenter on a custom graphical 
user interface (fig. S8).
We calibrated the sleeve output for each participant. During cali-
bration, we determined the first pressure at which participants could 
feel the indentation from actuators and the pressure at which the 
indentation started to feel uncomfortable. We activated a single ac-
tuator (#7) starting from 115 kPa and increased the pressure in 
E =
∑ xiyi
x2
i
(1)
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
11 of 12
increments of +15 kPa until the participant indicated they could feel 
the actuator by saying “yes. ” We continued ramping up the pressure 
in similar increments until participants indicated the pressure start-
ed to feel uncomfortable, upon which calibration was stopped. This 
procedure was repeated twice for each participant. The average 
minimum system- controllable indentation felt by participants was 
115 kPa, and one participant felt discomfort at 166 kPa (others felt 
no discomfort). The maximum pressure in the experiment was then 
set to the maximum comfortable pressure for each participant.
Stroking continuity
We used durations of 200, 400, and 600 ms and delays of 12.5, 25, 
and 50%, a subset of the modes Culbertson et al. (4) previously in-
vestigated. These nine actuation conditions were repeated twice in a 
randomized order.
Actuator localization
We inflated actuators to the calibrated maximum pressure one at a 
time, holding this state for 750 ms and deflating using a vacuum for 
500 ms. We then asked the participants to guess which actuator had 
been inflated, using the 1 to 8 location numbering shown in Figs. 2 
and 6. Actuator numbering was provided separately on a printed 
diagram. Before data collection, the participants were played each 
actuator once in order of numbering to allow them to develop a 
frame of reference. For the experiment, each actuator was played 
three times in a randomized order, resulting in a total of 24 actua-
tion stimuli.
Social touch gestures
For the social touch gesture study, we followed the same protocol as 
Salvato et al. (8) to ensure a fair comparison. First, participants lis-
tened to six audio prompts describing the social touch scenarios. 
Next, they experienced each of the six actuator- mapped gestures 
once in a consistent randomized order for each participant, without 
any knowledge of the gestures’ meaning.
During the experiment, participants were played each gesture 
pattern three times in a randomized order, adding up to a total of 18 
actuation sequences. After each gesture, participants verbally as-
signed a probability that a specific gesture had been played. They 
were told to give ratings in percentages from 0 to 100 in 10% incre-
ments and that their ratings for a single played gesture did not have 
to sum to 100%.
Last, participants were played each mapped gesture once and 
were asked for four ratings: valence, arousal, pleasantness, and au-
thenticity (whether the gesture felt like human touch). Valence and 
arousal scales were rated using printed Self- Assessment Manikins 
(43) with a Likert scale from 1 to 9. Authenticity of the gestures was 
rated using a printed Likert scale ranging from 0  = very unrealistic 
to 10 = very realistic.
Statistical analysis
Fabric characterization
For each fabric, we tested N  =  3 samples and used the mean re-
sponse to calculate the effective stiffness.
Actuator characterization
For each part of the actuator characterization, we tested the follow-
ing number of actuators: force testing N  = 4, cycling testing N  = 3, 
and actuator frequency response N  = 3. We computed the average 
response per pressure, cycle, and frequency, respectively. For the 
force testing and the cycling testing, the averages per pressure are 
given in tables S3 and S4. We added the SD to the tables because it is 
representative of the robustness of the actuator response.
User study
The user study was conducted with N  = 32 participants. For the ac-
tuator localization results, we added how many times each partici-
pant guessed a certain actuator (correct or incorrect) location given 
the actual actuation pattern and represent these cumulative results 
in bar graphs in Fig. 5.
For each stroke duration, we calculated the average continuity 
and pleasantness ratings across all participants. The SD was added 
to Fig. 6 to assess the level of consensus in the ratings.
In the confusion matrix shown in Fig. 6C, we display the average 
scores that participants assigned to each gesture. For instance, if 
participant 1 assigned 75% attention and 25% happiness to the at-
tention queue and participant 2 assigned 60% attention and 30% 
love, the attention row of the matrix would show the following aver-
age scores: attention, 67.5%; happiness, 12.5%; and love, 15%.
Supplementary Materials
The PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S8
tables S1 to S4
References (44–57)
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Movies S1 and S2
MDaR Reproducibility checklist
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. i. eibl- eibesfeldt, human ethology, in New Aspects of Human Ethology, a. Schmitt,  
K. a tzwanger, K. Grammer, K. Schäfer, eds. (Springer US, 1997), pp. 1–23.
 2. M. J. hertenstein, R. holmes, M. Mcc ullough, D. Keltner, t he communication of emotion 
via touch. Emotion 9, 566–573 (2009).
 3. K. o . Johnson, t he roles and functions of cutaneous mechanoreceptors. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 11, 455–461 (2001).
 4. h. c ulbertson, c. M. nunez, a. israr, F. lau, F. a bnousi, a. M. okamura, a social haptic 
device to create continuous lateral motion using sequential normal indentation, in IEEE 
Haptics Symposium (ieee, 2018), pp. 32–39.
 5. R. a ckerley, i. carlsson, h. Wester, h. olausson, h. b . Wasling, touch perceptions across 
skin sites: Differences between sensitivity, direction discrimination and pleasantness. 
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8, 54 (2014).
 6. M. Y. t salamlal, n. o uarti, J. c. Martin, M. a mmi, haptic communication of dimensions of 
emotions using air jet based tactile stimulation. J. Multimodal User Interfaces 9, 69–77 
(2015).
 7. b . Jumet, Z. a. Zook, a. Yousaf, a. Rajappan, D. Xu, t . F. Yap, n. Fino, Z. liu,  
M. K. o ’Malley, D. J. Preston, Fluidically programmed wearable haptic textiles. Device 1, 
100059 (2023).
 8. M. Salvato, S. R. Williams, c. M. nunez, X. Zhu, a. israr, F. lau, K. Klumb, F. a bnousi,  
a. M. okamura, h. c ulbertson, Data- driven sparse skin stimulation can convey social 
touch information to humans. IEEE Trans. Haptics 15, 392–404 (2022).
 9. K. e. Macl ean, haptic interaction design for everyday interfaces. Rev. Hum. Factors Ergon. 
4, 149–194 (2008).
 10. c. du Pasquier, t . chen, S. t ibbits, K. Shea, Design and computational modeling of a 3D 
printed pneumatic toolkit for soft robotics. Soft Robot. 6, 657–663 (2019).
 11. R. F. Shepherd, F. ilievski, W. choi, S. a. Morin, a. a. Stokes, a. D. Mazzeo, X. chen, M. Wang, 
G. M. Whitesides, Multigait soft robot. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 20400–20403 
(2011).
 12. S. biswas, Y. Visell, emerging material technologies for haptics. Adv. Mater. Technol. 4, 
1900042 (2019).
 13. W. Wu, h. culbertson, Wearable haptic pneumatic device for creating the illusion of 
lateral motion on the arm, in 2019 IEEE World Haptics Conference, WHC 2019 (ieee, 2019), 
pp. 193–198.
 14. a. Shtarbanov, M. Zhu, n. c olonnese, a. hajiagha Memar, Sleeveio: Modular and 
reconfigurable platform for multimodal wearable haptic feedback interactions, in UIST 
2023 -  Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology [a ssociation for computing Machinery (acM), 2023], article no. 70, pp. 1–15.
 15. S. Kanjanapas, c. M. nunez, S. R. Williams, a. M. okamura, M. l uo, Design and analysis of 
pneumatic 2- DoF soft haptic devices for shear display. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 4, 
1365–1371 (2019).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

du Pasquier et al., Sci. Robot. 9, eado3887 (2024)     18 December 2024
Science RoboticS  |  ReSeaR ch aR ticle
12 of 12
 16. M. Zhu, a. h. Memar, a. Gupta, M. Samad, P . agarwal, Y. Visell, S. J. Keller, n. colonnese, 
PneuSleeve: in- fabric multimodal actuation and sensing in a soft, compact, and 
expressive haptic sleeve, in Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems -  
Proceedings (acM, 2020), pp 1–12.
 17. M. Raitor, J. M. Walker, a. M. okamura, h. c ulbertson, WRaP: Wearable, restricted- aperture 
pneumatics for haptic guidance, in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (ieee, 2017), pp. 427–432.
 18. D. J. Spencer, Knitting Technology: A Comprehensive Handbook and Practical Guide 
(technomic Pub., 2001).
 19. P . h. nguyen, W. Zhang, Design and computational modeling of fabric soft pneumatic 
actuators for wearable assistive devices. Sci. Rep. 10, 9638 (2020).
 20. o . Kilic a fsar, a. Shtarbanov, h. Mor, K. nakagaki, J. Forman, K. Modrei, S. h. Jeong,  
K. h jort, K. höök, h. ishii, omniFiber: i ntegrated fluidic fiber actuators for weaving 
movement based interactions into the fabric of everyday life, in UIST 2021 -  Proceedings of 
the 34th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (acM, 2021), 
pp. 1010–1026.
 21. Y. l uo, K. Wu, t . s. Palacios, W. Matusik, Knitui: Fabricating interactive and sensing textiles 
with machine knitting, in Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (acM, 2021), article no. 668, 10.1145/3411764.3445780.
 22. Y. l uo, K. Wu, a. Spielberg, M. Foshey, D. Rus, t. Palacios, W. Matusik, Digital fabrication of 
pneumatic actuators with integrated sensing by machine knitting, in CHI ‘22: Proceedings 
of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (acM, 2022), article. 
no. 175, 10.1145/3491102.3517577.
 23. J. h. Kim, K. huang, S. White, M. c onroy, c. h.- l. Kao, KnitDermis: Fabricating tactile 
on- body interfaces through machine knitting, in DIS ‘21: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference (acM, 2021), pp. 1183–1200.
 24. J. h. Kim, S. D. Patil, S. Matson, M. c onroy, c. h.- l. Kao, KnitSkin: Machine- knitted scaled 
skin for locomotion, in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (acM, 
2022), pp. 1–15.
 25. V. Sanchez, c. J. Payne, D. J. Preston, J. t. a lvarez, J. c. Weaver, a. t. a talay, M. boyvat,  
D. M. Vogt, R. J. Wood, G. M. Whitesides, c. J. Walsh, Smart thermally actuating textiles. 
Adv. Mater. Technol. 5, 2000383 (2020).
 26. J. h. Kim, J. Stilling, M. o ’Dell, c. h.- l. Kao, KnitDema: Robotic textile as personalized 
edema mobilization device, in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (acM, 2023), pp. 1–19.
 27. e . churchill, J. t . Mcc onville, Sampling and Data Gathering Strategies for Future USAF 
Anthropometry (a erospace Medical Research laboratory, 1976).
 28. R. W. cholewiak, a. a. c ollins, Vibrotactile localization on the arm: effects of place, space, 
and age. Percept. Psychophys. 65, 1058–1077 (2003).
 29. M. F. nolan, t wo- point discrimination assessment in the upper limb in young adult men 
and women. Phys. Ther. 62, 965–969 (1982).
 30. a. Shtarbanov, Flowio development platform -  t he pneumatic Raspberry Pi for soft 
robotics in Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems -  Proceedings (acM, 2021), 
pp. 1–6.
 31. a. Shrivastava, Programmable-  air; https://www.programmableair.com/.
 32. S. J. Kim, h. chang, J. Park, J. Kim, Design of a portable pneumatic power source with 
high output pressure for wearable robotic applications. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 3, 
4351–4358 (2018).
 33. a. Schirmer, i. c roy, R. ackerley, What are c- tactile afferents and how do they relate to 
“affective touch”? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 151, 105236 (2023).
 34. M. J. hertenstein, D. Keltner, b. a pp, b. a. bulleit, a. R. Jaskolka, touch communicates 
distinct emotions. Emotion 6, 528–533 (2006).
 35. S. c. hauser, S. Mci ntyre, a. israr, h. olausson, G. J. Gerling, Uncovering human- to- human 
physical interactions that underlie emotional and affective touch communication, in 
2019 IEE World Haptics Conference (WHC) (ieee, 2019), pp. 407–412.
 36. a. bhattacharyya, on a measure of divergence between two multinomial populations. 
Sankhyā: Indian J. Stat. 7, 401–406 (1946).
 37. K. Singal, M. S. Dimitriyev, S. e. Gonzalez, a. P . cachine, S. Quinn, e. a. Matsumoto, 
Programming mechanics in knitted materials, stitch by stitch. Nat. Commun. 15, 2622 
(2024).
 38. M. Schünke, e. Schulte, U. Schumacher, Thieme Atlas of Anatomy: General Anatomy and 
Musculoskeletal System (t hieme, 2006).
 39. G. huisman, Social touch technology: a survey of haptic technology for social touch. IEEE 
Trans. Haptics 10, 391–408 (2017).
 40. a. S. MacKlin, J. M. Yau, M. K. o ’Malley, evaluating the effect of stimulus duration on 
vibrotactile cue localizability with a tactile sleeve. IEEE Trans. Haptics 14, 328–334 (2021).
 41. e . Y. bann, J. J. bryson, Measuring cultural relativity of emotional valence and arousal 
using semantic clustering and t witter, in Cooperative Minds: Social Interaction and Group 
Dynamics -  Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci 
2013, M. Knauff, ed. (c ognitive Science Society, 2013), pp. 1809–1814.
 42. aStM Standard D4694- 09, 2020, “Standard test method for deflections with a 
falling- weight- type impulse” (aStM i nternational, 2020).
 43. M. M. bradley, P . J. lang, Measuring emotion: t he self- assessment manikin and the 
semantic differential. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 25, 49–59 (1994).
 44. D. nair, G. Stankaitis, S. Duback, R. Geoffrion, J. b. Jackson, handwriting correction system 
using wearable sleeve with optimal tactor configuration, in 2021 18th International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Robots, UR 2021 (ieee, 2021), pp. 283–289.
 45. Y. liu, S. n ishikawa, Y. a. Seong, t hermocaress: a wearable haptic device with illusory 
moving thermal stimulation, in Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (acM, 2021), article no. 214.
 46. e . l eroy, R. hinchet, h. Shea, Multimode hydraulically amplified electrostatic actuators for 
wearable haptics. Adv. Mater. 32, 2002564 (2020).
 47. e . M. Young, a. h. Memar, P . agarwal, n. c olonnese, bellowband: a pneumatic wristband 
for delivering local pressure and vibration, in 2019 IEEE World Haptics Conference, WHC 
2019 (ieee, 2019), pp. 55–60.
 48. S. basu, J. t sai, a. Majewicz, e valuation of tactile guidance cue mappings for emergency 
percutaneous needle insertion, in IEEE Haptics Symposium, HAPTICS (ieee, 2016), pp. 
106–112.
 49. G. huisman, a. Darriba Frederiks, b . Van Dijk, D. hevlen, b. Krose, t he taSSt: tactile sleeve 
for social touch, in 2013 World Haptics Conference, WHC 2013 (ieee, 2013), pp. 211–216.
 50. K. bark, J. Wheeler, G. l ee, J. Savall, M. cutkosky, a wearable skin stretch device for haptic 
feedback, in Proceedings -  3rd Joint EuroHaptics Conference and Symposium on Haptic 
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, World Haptics 2009 (ieee, 
2009), pp. 464–469.
 51. h. P . chien, M. c. Wu, c. c. hsu, Flowing- haptic sleeve: Research on apparent tactile 
motion applied to simulating the feeling of flow on the arm, in UbiComp/ISWC 2021 -  
Adjunct Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Symposium on 
Wearable Computers (acM, 2021), pp. 550–554.
 52. c. Y. chen, Y. Y. chen, Y. J. chung, n. h. Yu, Motion guidance sleeve: Guiding the forearm 
rotation through external artificial muscles, in Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems -  Proceedings (acM, 2016), pp. 3272–3276.
 53. V. R. borkowska, a. Mcc onnell, S. Vijayakumar, a. Stokes, a. D. Roche, a haptic sleeve as a 
method of mechanotactile feedback restoration for myoelectric hand prosthesis users. 
Front. Rehabilit. Sci. 3, 806479 (2022).
 54. J. Weda, D. Kolesnyk, a. Mader, J. van erp, experiencing touch by technology, in Haptics: 
Science, Technology, Applications: 13th International Conference on Human Haptic Sensing 
and Touch Enabled Computer Applications, EuroHaptics 2022, Hamburg, Germany, May 
22–25, 2022, Proceedings, h. Seifi, a. M. l. Kappers, o . Schneider, K. Drewing,  
c. Pacchierotti, a. a bbasimoshaei, G. huisman, t. a. Kern, eds. , vol 13235 of Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science (Springer, 2022), pp. 110–118.
 55. h. Z. tan, c. M. Reed, Y. Jiao, Z. D. Perez, e. c. Wilson, J. Jung, J. S. Martinez, F. M. Severgnini, 
a cquisition of 500 english words through a ta ctile Phonemic Sleeve (taPS). IEEE Trans. 
Haptics 13, 745–760 (2020).
 56. Z. Zhang, R. héron, e. l ecolinet, F. Detienne, S. Safin, Visualtouch: enhancing affective 
touch communication with multi- modality stimulation, in ICMI 2019 -  Proceedings of the 
2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (acM, 2019), pp. 114–123.
 57. a. Papadopoulou, J. b erry, t . Knight, R. Picard, a ffective sleeve: Wearable materials with 
haptic action for promoting calmness, in Distributed, Ambient and Pervasive Interactions: 
7th International Conference, DAPI 2019, Held as Part of the 21st HCI International 
Conference, HCII 2019, Orlando, FL, USA, July 26–31, 2019, Proceedings, n. Streitz,  
S. Konomi, eds., vol. 11587 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Springer, 2019),  
pp. 304–319.
Acknowledgments: We thank P . liu, e. Sigin, and J. Jang for the support in collecting 
experimental data and t . buchner for assisting in hardware part sourcing. We also 
acknowledge the contributions of a. Parker, l. a mbali, and S. Williams for their assistance 
with physical prototyping, early design ideation, and photographic documentation. 
Funding: t his work was supported in part by the national Science Foundation grant nos. 
2301355 and 2301356. Author contributions: c onceptualization: c.d.P ., i.S., and a.o . 
Methodology: c.d.P ., l.t e., i.S., l.t i., and a.o . investigation: c.d.P ., l.t e., i.S., l.t i., l.P ., and t .c. 
Visualization: c.d.P . and l.t e. Funding acquisition: c.d.P ., t .c., S.t ., and a.o . Project 
administration: c.d.P . Supervision: c.d.P ., t .c., S.t ., and a.o . Writing—original draft: c.d.P ., l.t e., 
i.S., and l.t i. Writing—review and editing: c.d.P ., S.t ., and a.o . Competing interests: c.d.P ., 
a.M.o ., S.t ., l.t ., and i.S. are inventors on pending patent 63/612 894 (“Wearable device 
concept powered by a combination of soft pneumatic actuators and variable stiffness”). t he 
other authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. Data and materials availability:  
a ll uniaxial test data are freely available for download using the following link: https://doi.
org/10.25740/jk534ft2383.
Submitted 13 February 2024 
a ccepted 19 november 2024 
Published 18 December 2024 
10.1126/scirobotics.ado3887
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026

Haptiknit: Distributed stiffness knitting for wearable haptics
Cosima du Pasquier, Lavender Tessmer, Ian Scholl, Liana Tilton, Tian Chen, Skylar Tibbits, and Allison Okamura
Sci. Robot. 9 (97), eado3887.  DOI: 10.1126/scirobotics.ado3887
Editor’s summary
Wearable haptic devices can convey artificial touch during human computer interaction, but it is difficult to achieve
sufficient forces and sensation with the comfort of a soft material. By combining machine knitting and pneumatic
actuation, du Pasquier et al. developed a haptic sleeve with a high-stiffness outer layer that grounds the actuation force
and a lower stiffness inner layer that transfers load to the skin. The Haptiknit sleeve was tested with 32 participants
who could determine the location of an inflated actuator in a two-by-eight grid with high accuracy. The sleeve was
also used to convey social touch gestures by inflating the actuators in different durations and patterns. Its untethered,
portable operation holds promise for applications such as teleoperation or navigation. —Melisa Yashinski
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.ado3887
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Robotics (ISSN 2470-9476) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Robotics is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2024 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Tsinghua University on September 21, 2026
