ABSTRACT
Through the explo ration of plant motion, this paper 
introduces a method called the Metaphor Ring, which 
proposes the use of metaphor to define t he types of 
information that can be conveyed through shape-
changing interfaces inspired by plant motion.
To put this method into practice, the paper presents five 
potential use cases  that use soft robotics  technology 
to apply plant motion to shape-changing interfaces to 
enhance the user experience  and convey information 
in a more intuitive and natural way through motion. 
Each
 physical object provides 2-3 types  of dynamic 
feedback,
 enabling the presentation of status  and data 
from computers and home appliances. Each pattern is  
independent, they could be applied  to different usage 
scenarios, 
bridging the gap of inconsistent deformation 
semantics between use cases and providing an entry 
p
oint for designing shape-changing interfaces.
Info-Motion: Using the Metaphor of Plant Motion for Information
Communication in Shape-changing Interface
Jiawen Yao
Berlin-Weißensee art Academy
Berlin, Germany
jiawen.yao@stud.kh-berlin.de
[A]
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this 
work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
TEI ’24, February 11–14, 2024, Cork, Ireland
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0402-4/24/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3623509.3633397
Authors Keywords
soft robotic; metaphor; tangible interaction; plant 
motion; data visualization .
CSS Concepts
• Human-centered computing~Human computer 
Interaction~design process and methods 
1. INTRODUCTION
The Shape Changing Interface (SCI) refers to the physical 
and deformable interactive surface. It provides a rich 
user experience through changes in shape and allows 
users to interact with electronic devices by manipulating 
its shape. Advances in materials science have broadened 
the potential applications of shape-changing interfaces, 
pushing the boundaries of traditional screen interactions 
limited to a single piece of glass. The application of 
soft robots in shape-changing interfaces (SCIs) covers 
different usage scenarios, and the flexible deformation 
of SCIs adapts to different usage purposes. Many 
researchers have taken inspiration from plants and 
chosen soft robots as carriers to create highly flexible 
and aesthetically organic interfaces that present various 
information. On the one hand, the use of soft robotic 
technology enables the reconstruction of everyday 
objects, the synchronous input and output of shapes, and 
the construction of tools [10, 11, 12, 13]. Alternatively, 
the same platform, inspired by plant structures, can 
be used to achieve a degree of structural strength and 
flexibility for industrial or robotic applications [14, 
15]. Soft robotics has both biological properties and 
high flexibility. However, there are some gaps in these 
studies. Although they draw inspiration from botanical 
features, the contextual continuity is not consistently 
applied in the design. In addition, soft robot shape-
shifting interfaces have largely focused on achieving 
synchronous shapes in the physical and digital realms, 
or on imitating existing objects through shape-shifting. 
However, soft robotics technology has the potential 
for independent design principles to create novel 
objects that meet the diverse interaction needs of users. 
Furthermore, SCI currently faces the challenge that the 
relationship between deformation in each application 
scenario and the corresponding conveyed information 
lacks a unified guideline [7].
This paper focuses on the following questions What 
insights can be drawn from the plant context to guide 
user interface design? How can user interfaces inspired 
by plant motion effectively convey information by 
exploiting the qualities of soft robotics? 
[B]
The project is divided into two main parts, theoretical 
development, and design practice. In dealing with the 
relationship between these two parts, the RTD (research 
through design) approach was adopted, which treats the 
design process itself as part of the research outcome. 
Although this paper presents the project in the order 
from theory to practice, the actual design practice and 
the development of the theory are intertwined in the 
process.
In the context of theoretical development, this paper 
revolves around the above set of research questions. 
By integrating research into plant dynamics and user 
testing, the paper introduces the use of the ‘metaphor 
ring’ as an approach to defining the types of information 
that can be conveyed by the motions demonstrated by 
individual objects. 
In the realm of design practice, this paper takes a user-
centric approach to explore the following aspects: 
1. Defining the applicable plant motions for interactive 
interfaces, 
2. Material and aesthetic experiments for objects that 
carry motions, and 
3. Presenting potential use cases and contextual 
scenarios. 
2. THEORY BUILDING AND MOTION CATEGORISA -
TION
2.1 Theory development for conveying information by 
metaphor
The project was initially inspired by the mimosa, when 
its leaves are touched, the whole leaf surface closes, 
which people interpreted as shyness, the example of the 
mimosa fulfils exactly some elements of the interaction, 
input: our touch, feedback: motion-closing, information: 
shyness. In truth, the original meaning of the mimosa is 
not shyness, it is a human emotional projection of that 
motion.
The concept of kinesthetic empathy  [3] illustrates the 
emotional projection of humans onto the performances 
of other humans, because of mirror neurons, humans 
can internally imitate creatures with similar structures 
to themselves, a behavior known as empathy for 
anthropomorphic objects.  Based on this theory, Miyoshi 
proposed empathy for non-anthropomorphic objects, 
emphasizing that humans can project emotion to an object 
even if it does not have a human-like structure, as long 
as the motion of the object is the one we have experience 
with, which can be either from our observation of other 
objects or from our embodied experience [4].Based on 
this theory, humans project emotion to plants because 
the plant’s motions are part of the prior knowledge that 
humans acquire through long-term observation of plants.
To focus on the context of plant motion in a more human-
centered way, it is necessary to mention the impressions 
of plant motion from a cultural perspective. In some 
science fiction movies with plants as protagonists, plants 
are depicted as frightening creatures, and in a human-
centered nature, the standard is that humans or mammals 
are the most soulful creatures, and it would frighten us 
if a plant became a creature with self-consciousness 
comparable to humans.
The trees in The Day of the Triffids move on their own, 
waving their branches to attack humans. The waving of 
flagellated plant branches is a metaphor and projection of 
colonial violence. Another example is the Venus flytrap, 
scientifically known as Dionaea muscipula, which later 
acquired the common name “Venus flytrap”. In Roman 
mythology, “Venus” symbolized love, desire, and allure, 
which resonates with the carnivorous and trapping 
nature of the plant. However, as concepts and ideas have 
evolved, the association with “Venus” has gradually 
been minimized. We do not project monsters for no 
reason, unless they are all pieced together by fragmented 
metaphors[6] and part of our previous knowledge.
Metaphors [5] or mental models [2] are valuable design 
techniques. For example, in interface design, the metaphor 
of folders helps users understand how computers process 
data. Actions such as dragging files and creating or 
deleting files mimic real-world interactions with folders 
and trash cans. However, the actual process of computer 
file management is more complex. Metaphors allow 
us to use familiar and concrete objects to understand 
unfamiliar and abstract concepts.
Typically, designers search for an appropriate metaphor 
based on the characteristics of the new concept 
and system. However, this often requires extensive 
experience and can be challenging to find a unique and 
appropriate metaphor. Conversely, it is also valuable to 
explore potential metaphors that can be used in interface 
interactions. This approach provides more guidance for 
potential future designs.
The hypothesis suggests that the interaction between the 
conceptual metaphor of plant motion and the application 
metaphor in interface design leads to the emergence of a 
novel method: the use of metaphorical plant motion as 
interactive feedback to assist users in understanding the 
information conveyed by the system.
2.2 Nine plant motions categories and five dimen-
sions
In the early stages of this research project, “motion” 
was defined as any change in the appearance of plants 
over time. This includes motion, speed, texture, scale, 
position, and color. However, once classified, it was 
found that complete plant movements are made up of 
the intersections of different components. For example, 
a single plant may simultaneously exhibit changes 
in motion, color, and speed, with each dimension 
influencing the others. If each dimension is considered 
as an independent motion, the semantics of the overall 
motion is lost.
As a result, the final definition of ‘motion’ in this project 
is limited to ‘movement’. The remaining dimensions, 
namely speed, texture, scale, position and colour, are 
defined as five factors that can influence the perception 
of motion. In this study, section 2.2 of the user testing 
focuses primarily on investigating the effect of speed 
variation on people’s perception of motion.
This was followed by an exploration of plant motion 
and then a further categorization of plant motion. The 
classification criteria of other studies were also referred 
to. In Miyoshi’s research [4], the classification is more 
focused on the difference in aesthetic body shape of the 
motion, for example, jumping and twisting will bring 
different feelings to the body. In Morphino’s research 
[1], the classification is more from the perspective of 
structural variation and refers to the classification of 
motion in the field of plants and animals, for example, 
pufferfish and female cane toads both have the 
characteristics of inflation, but because the expansion 
of pufferfish is based on the fold structure, they are 
classified as two different types of motion. The plant 
classification in this paper is based on [1, 4], and some 
new classification criteria are proposed to further explore 
the potential metaphors inherent in plant motion.
1. The context and intention of the plant’s motion.
2. User projection and association of motion.
The following is two examples of the definition of each 
motion: rotation and bend.
Rotation is defined as a motion that runs in a certain 
direction but changes direction. In the context of plants, 
it has the meaning of finding direction. For example, 
a sunflower rotates in the direction of the sun, and a 
dodder changes its direction of growth to find a host.
Bend is defined as the motion of a plant being flexed or 
curved due to an external force. In the context of plants, 
“bend” conveys the concept of endurance. For instance, 
a tree branch will bend when subjected to gentle winds, 
signifying its ability to withstand moderate forces.
However, excessive wind strength can lead to the branch 
breaking. Initially, bend was classified as a subcategory 
of Rotation, as its movement can also be interpreted 
as directional motion. However, due to the distinctive 
connotation of bearing force associated with bend, it 
was later determined to be a separate category based 
on user testing. The users’ perception of Bend differed 
from that of Rotation, thus So it came out as a separate 
category.
As the project progressed, the classification was iterated 
many times through user testing and semantic analysis, 
and [C] is the final version.
3. DESIGN PRACTICE AND PROTOTYPE
3.1 Prototyping with low-quality material 
Based on the initial classification, these motions are 
transferred to physical objects. First, different possibili -
ties were imagined, recorded in sketches [D], and then 
produced with low quality materials, using two methods 
of transfer: 
1. Apply different motions to the same shape [E, F, 
O, P]. For example, bend, rotate, expand and open/
expend
(nourish)
bend
(affordence)
rebound
(endurance, release)
rotate
(seek, search)
shrink
(tension, pressure)
open/close
(pleasant, protect)
fall
(timing)
float
(spread, inform)
roll
(out of control)
9 Classifications of plant motion
[C] [D]
close were applied to the cylinder. In the initial 
prototyping, the balloons, rubber bands and 1mm 
thick cardboard were used and inflated with a 100ml 
syringe. The pneumatics and the elasticity of the 
rubber band interact with each other to provide a 
sense of biological dynamic.
2. Transferring the same motion with different materials 
and shapes [G, H, I]. To achieve the same motion: 
rebound, a combination of different materials such 
as the 0.2mm thick polyethylene sheet, silicone, 
and rubber band were experimented with,  a string 
system was used to control the motion.
3.2 User test 1 and take-away 
A user test was then conducted on these prototypes to 
examine the following aspects: 
1. If these models, inspired by plant motion, are able 
to evoke the user’s association with plants, they will 
provide a basis for the theory of using metaphors to 
communicate information.
2. The user’s perception of the motion, providing 
insight into the characteristics of the information 
being conveyed.
3. Whether changes in the speed of the same motion 
affect the user’s perception of it. 
4. If the prototypes elicit spontaneous user interaction, 
explore potential avenues for interaction.
The user test procedure is as follows: First, participants 
were shown a picture of a static model on the screen and 
then asked the following question: 
1) If these models had the ability to move, how do you 
envision their motions? 
2) Assuming that the models moved as you imagined, 
and that your actions had the potential to influence these 
motions or interact with the objects, how would you 
prefer to engage with them - through physical contact or 
without direct contact?
In the second phase, the testers were presented with the  
[E] [F]
[G] [H]
[I] [J]
[K] [L]
[M] [N]
[O] [P] [Q]
[R] [S] [T]
video of the prototypes and were prompted with the 
following questions: 
3) What do you feel or associate with this motion? 
The same motion was then played back at an accelerated 
speed and the testers were asked: 
4) Whether you perceived the motions differently and, if 
so, whether this resulted in a distinct association.
During the test, users were encouraged to express their 
observations and interpretations in various ways, such 
as drawings or free description [U]. A total of five 
testers participated in the test, and this paper focuses 
only on providing a summary [V] of the user test and 
the takeaways:
• The models evoke associations with plants, but 
they cannot be attributed to a specific plant.
• Users may also associate them with other 
organisms. For example, the model shown in [F], 
which is inspired by the open/close transfer on 
a cylinder, was associated with flowers by some 
users, while others associated it with hermit 
crabs.
• The user’s perception of each movement varies, 
and the speed of the motion can affect how they 
feel. For example, in the case of the [F] model, 
one user commented that it seemed to convey an 
ongoing event, and as the speed increased, they 
experienced a sense of breathlessness. Another 
user described it as appearing somewhat anxious 
× 1.0 × 1.0
Objects AssociationLooks like 
× 2.0 × 2.0
[S]
[R]
[F]
[E]
[I]
[G]
[K]
[O]
[P]
tired; dying; on/off
has limitations; 
looking for 
sunlight; gets itself 
warm
rhythmically; 
breathing; is 
talking; curious
searching; observe; 
indicates direction
strength; 
accumulating; 
swings; comes 
out in order; 
shrinking; tension
falls down, it 
can’t hold its own 
weight, blown by 
the wind
detecting sth, 
waiting the other 
side,searching
absorbing sth, 
expansion, 
transfering sth, 
sucking sth, 
explodes
 more vital; keeps 
growing; beyond 
a certain amount
the same
the same
the same
dancing; hesitant; 
twists itself
emergency; 
panic; lost; 
warnning; can’t 
breath; fear; hide
ignores me; 
mechanical
imblance
angry; venting 
emotion; vibrant
struggles, it needs 
help
warning, catching 
my attention, 
threaten
[V]
[U]

User test 1
3.1) If this object is this creature, which 
serves for you, what message do you want 
its motions to tell you?
User test 1 
3) What kind of properties, feelings or 
associations does this motion evoke in you? 
and trying to hide.
• The prototype itself can elicit spontaneous 
interactions from the user, with users expressing 
a desire to control its opening and closing by 
proximity of their hands or engaging in actions 
to soothe it [U].
4. FROM MOTION TO INFORMATION
Based on the user tests, a semantic analysis of the mo -
tion of each object was then conducted.
4.1 Metaphor ring
First, a list was compiled of each motion and its 
corresponding plant source in the model. The intention 
of the plant motion was then compared with the 
user’s perception from the user test. By analyzing the 
metaphorical aspects of the movement, the associated 
type of information was determined. This method, called 
Metaphor Ring [W], facilitated the gradual transition of 
semantics from the context of the plant to the type of 
information conveyed. 
The progression followed an inner-to-outer ring pattern: 
The innermost ring represents the original plant motions, 
while the second ring  represents the characteristics of 
these motions derived from user asssociation and the 
original context of plants. The outermost ring consists 
of information types which share similar characteristics, 
and corresponding to a data type or system state.
To help the reader better understand the “metaphor ring”, 
let’s take the example of “hide/bloom”. In the innermost 
ring of images we have our prototype, which was 
originally inspired by close/open, two motions derived 
respectively from the oxail triangle’s concealment 
of light and the common flowering of most plants. 
Our expectation was that it could convey two related 
meanings. Subsequently, through the user-generated 
descriptions in User Test 1, it was observed that users 
tended to use adjectives with two different tendencies 
to describe these two actions (as recorded in the second 
ring of [W]).
[W]
Plant 
motion
Characteristic
Information Information 
with the similar with the similar 
charateristiccharateristic
[18]
User Test 
defensive
Air quality is 
bad / toxic
 nosie is 
annoyed
warning
afraid
hide
Water is too 
hot
[9]
curious
vigorous
healthy
good 
weather
/ temperature 
suffcient 
humidity
bloom
* alternative user test 2
some potentcial information can also be 
proposed by researcher according their 
expectations and then users is invited to 
match them with the characteristics.
Breathing
concrete abstract
User Test 
Users were then asked to consider the available information about the object. If they 
imagined the object as a specific organism, they could articulate the information 
that the organism conveyed, often related to the environment. For example, one user 
perceived that the ‘hide’ movement was similar to a hermit crab sensing danger in the 
environment, possibly from predators, or when the flower blooms it indicates humidity 
and a favourable environment. As a result, we segmented the information from the 
user conversations into the three rings shown in [W].
It’s important to note that User Test 1 was a qualitative study using free-form user 
descriptions, so the researchers had to categorise and summarise the information into 
different rings themselves. 
In this regard, five objects were selected as case studies in this paper, each featuring 
2-3 distinct patterns. The term “pattern” refers to the correspondence between motion 
and information characteristics. The remaining patterns can be seen in [X] and  [Y].
4.2 How to use metaphor ring in two types of research
In the context of shape changing interface (SCI) processes, it can be used for two 
different purposes, classified as ‘ top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’ research [19] [20], based 
on the differences in their research objectives and approaches. 
Object Plant motion Pattern*
（biological motion - character）
Use case
(Information type)
Flower humidity, air quality,
noise level
Flytrap bluetooth, vacuum cleaner
Branch
energy, 
electricity,
notification
Cactus
upload and
download, 
financial management
Balsam Time, self- awareness
Bloom-beneficial Hide-harmful
Detect-coupling
 Prey-alarm
Sway-resilient
 Sprout-fresh Broken-overloaded
Wet-increaseDry-decrease
Digest-in analysis
Absorb-transporting
Grow- in tense
 Explode-reminding
open/close
open/close
bend
expend shrink 
shrink        rebound 
 [X]
[Y]
4.2.1 Botton-up research
The first type of research is the bottom-up approach, with the objective of developing 
new deformable surfaces driven by novel materials, structures, and biomimetic de -
signs, and ultimately proposing several potential use cases. For this type of research, 
it can begin by either tracing it back to its inherent metaphorical origins or actively 
assigning it an existing metaphor. Then, potential use cases can be explored using the 
approach described in section 4.1.
4.2.2 Top-down research
The second type of research adopts a  top-down approach, aiming to find an effective 
morphological solution for conveying the required information within a given 
application scenario. In this type of research, deformable surfaces associated with 
different metaphors related to the context can be created, or the metaphor ring 
documented by previous researchers can be referenced. The alignment of the model 
with the intended information is then tested in User Test 2.
4.2.3 User test 2 
Some potentcial information can also be proposed by researcher according their 
Bloom-beneficial
Sway-resilient Dry-decrease
Hide-harmful
Sprout-fresh Wet-increaseBroken-overloaded Absorb-transporting
Detect-coupling Prey-alarm Digest-in analysis Grow- in tense Explode-reminding

[Z]
expectations firstly and then users are invited to match 
them with the characteristics. For this test, specific 
information relevant to the application scenario is 
included with different characteristics. For example, in a 
particular scenario it may be important to know whether 
the air quality is suitable for human habitation or not, 
or to assess whether noise levels exceed the standard 
learning environment. These information with needed 
features are recorded on cards and users are asked to 
match specific information types to a fearure motion.
4.2.4 Conclusion
It needs to be made clear that these two situations are 
different. While both researchers have expectations about 
the information the model should convey, bottom-up 
research aims to explore possibilities, so researchers’ 
expectations about what the model can convey are 
typically relatively vague. Top-down research, on the 
other hand, aims to validate the consistency between 
the information expected and the information ultimately 
conveyed by the model. Although User Test 2 was not 
specifically conducted in this paper, it is recommended 
that when using the metaphor ring, researchers should 
consider using testing methods similar to User Test 2 to 
ensure the consistency and accuracy of the information 
conveyed.
4.3 Managing the consistency between expectations 
and outcomes
If the research is bottom-up, the management approach 
may lean more towards option 2, actively seeking out 
different information opportunities.
If it is a top-down research, where specific usage 
scenarios already exist, then approaches 1 and 3 are 
essential. In addition, continuous model adjustments 
are necessary, following the metaphor ring method of 
testing the new model until it meets expectations.
1. Eliminate ambiguity:  If the results of user testing do 
not align, and the mismatch is limited in scope, such as 
when we intend the model to convey “hazard,” but users 
describe it as “urgent,” “breathless,” or “alert,” which 
exhibit subtle differences among these adjectives, it is 
necessary to consider modifying the model’s motion 
speed, shape, or materials. For instance, during Test of 
[F], when the “hide” motion is conducted faster, users 
might associate it with a worse environment. Through 
iterative testing and adjustments, refine the model’s 
motion details to more accurately align with the expected 
information, eliminating potential ambiguities.
2.Believe collective percepytion:  If the users’ 
descriptions as a whole differ from expectations, but 
show a high degree of overlap, the model may be able to 
describe new types of information. In this case, further 
exploration of potential uses and application scenarios 
can be undertaken to align with user perceptions.
3. Discarding irrelevant models: If the user’s 
descriptions are not at all relevant to expectations, there is 
no consistency in the descriptions among users, and they 
cannot be correlated with other potential information 
types, then it is necessary to discard the model.
5. USE CASES
To provide a more specific and accurate demonstration 
of how these motions convey information, five possible 
use cases have been proposed [Z]:
1. Air qualities 
This use case uses patterns “bloom-beneficial” 
and “Hide-harmful”, since the motion’s expressible 
context is environment-oriented, the metaphor is as 
follows: it blossoms in a good environment and hides 
in a bad environment. Therefore, user can choose to let 
it represent air quality.By placing this object in a home 
or office environment, when the air quality is good, it 
[Aa] [Bb]
remains in an open state. However, when the air quality 
is poor, it gradually closes and exhibits small-scale 
intense motion, reminding the user to open windows or 
activate an air purifier.
2. Energy consumption
This use case utilizes two patterns associated with this 
object: “sway-resilient” and “broken-overloaded”. The 
context of this motion is intensity, carrying capacity, and 
limits. The metaphor is as follows: when the carrying 
capacity has not reached its limit, it exhibits intensity 
(intensity being caressed by the wind). However, when 
the carrying capacity reaches its limit, it is overloaded 
(broken by the wind). It is associated with energy, and 
when energy consumption has not reached its limit, it 
simply represents the intensity of use. Once energy use 
exceeds its capacity, though, it bends strongly, and users 
can straighten it to bend all actively used energy sources.
3. Bluetooth connection
This use case uses the “detect-coupling” pattern, 
with the metaphor inspired by the behaviour of a Venus 
flytrap. When the Venus flytrap is left open, its surface 
continuously detects the presence of insects, which can 
be associated with the process of pairing and capturing 
signals during Bluetooth coupling. If the Venus flytrap 
is part of a Bluetooth speaker, it will slowly move one 
side of its leaves when a person with a Bluetooth device 
walks by. Once the Bluetooth connection is established, 
both leaves stop moving and remain in the same inflated 
position, indicating a successful connection. Users can 
tap its surface to initiate Bluetooth pairing or disconnect.
4. Bank account
This use case utilizes two patterns associated with 
this object: “dry-decrease” and “absorb-transfer”. 
The metaphorical behaviour is inspired by the way a 
cactus absorbs water and expands when it rains, while 
it consumes internal water and decreases in volume 
when it is dry, which relates to the concepts of increase 
and transfer. In this use case, it represents bank account 
information. When someone makes a transfer to the 
account, the airbag gradually expands from top to 
bottom, and when money is spent from the account, it 
contracts to indicate a decrease in the balance. This visual 
representation aims to increase the user’s awareness of 
asset management.
5. Time
The use case utilises two patterns associated with the 
object: “grow-accumulating” and “ explode-reminding”. 
The metaphor is inspired by the way the seeds of a 
spring flower (such as the Harbinger of Spring) grow, 
accumulating energy internally. After a certain season, 
the seed pod may explode due to uneven internal 
pressure. This context involves the accumulation and 
release of pressure and energy. In this use case, the 
object is perceived as a timer that slowly accumulates 
over time, much like something that increases as the 
world progresses. As it accumulates, it gradually swells 
and when the set time is reached, it releases the stored 
energy to remind the user. Users can set the countdown 
in advance by gesture.
In all cases, motion is used as interactive feedback, 
where human gestures or changes in system status 
or data can be responded to in dynamic feedback, 
prompting the user to take the next action. It offers the 
following benefits:
• Intuitive and peripheral interaction: Users have 
the option to place it within their environment, 
serving as a subtle reminder that provides specific 
information without demanding excessive 
attention or interrupting their current actions.
• Enables tangible interaction [17] : It encourages 
users to utilize their bodies, gestures, and 
touch to send commands and access or modify 
information [Aa].
6. FABRICATION AND PNEUMATIC CONTROL
Rapid iteration was a key central factor in our choice 
of manufacturing tool, as our project is about exploring 
theory through practice. So we chose SLA printing 
to produce the negative module, which can achieve 
more complex structures than CNC, as well as tighter 
tolerances, and is fast and cost-effective.
First the desired inflatable shape is designed in Rhino 
software. Then the negativ moulds are 3D printed and 
the Ecoflex-0030 material is injected to form the desired 
shape. To integrate the soft and rigid components, we 
sew a 1mm knitted fabric onto the 3D printed structure 
and then attach the silicone component to it.
In addition, fabric as the adhesive is used in the 
[Cc]
combination of 3D component and silicone bag , so that 
the design process eliminates the need for the design of 
the hard connection structure, reducing the complexity 
of 3D printing, only need to design some of the surfaces 
need to be connected to the surface of the sewing needle 
eye for sewing 
6.1 Pneumatic control and information transfer
Flow IO [8] was used for pneumatic control.
Flow IO is more useful in the prototype process than 
as a final part of the product, because in the process 
of adjusting the motion it is necessary to upload 
the program several times and re-schedule the time 
intervals, for example in the normal programming LOW 
and HIGH are used to control the vacuum, inflate and 
release, and each time to change the inflate mode it is 
necessary to change the command line in the program, 
whereas the  Flow IO interface can select these modes 
directly without modifying the command line. 
In addition, it is modular so that the type of air pump 
can be changed to meet different flow rate requirements, 
the pumps can be replaced directly through a magnetic 
connector without having to weld the pumps repeatedly, 
and these pumps can be controlled by the same main 
module. So it was considered a good prototype of a tool 
that could simplify the workflow.
For possible further development, information from 
the system can be transmitted to Flow IO, envisioning 
different intensities of inflation signals, and output as 
distinct dynamic feedback. This information could 
come from:
1. Environmental information: It originates from 
the object’s internal built-in sensors, providing 
data about its surroundings.
2. Product-generated data: If the object is a part of 
an existing product, it can receive information 
from an app via Bluetooth.
3. User-Generated Content from the web: The 
object can also obtain some third-party content, 
such as weather conditions, from the internet or 
web-based sources.
In terms of tangible interaction, the use of thin copper 
films placed underneath 3D printed components less 
than 0.1mm thick has been experimented with [Bb]. 
These films can respond to touch and transmit the input 
to Flow IO, allowing users to access and modify data by 
touching the surface of the object [Aa].
It should be clarified that converting other information 
to Flow IO still requires reprogramming from the bottom 
up. This paper only tested the data collection from the 
sensor inside the object converted it to a pneumatic 
signal and represented it by the object’s motion, other 
types of data have not yet been tested. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
This paper proposes the Metaphor Ring as a guiding 
approach for the transmission of information in shape-
changing interface. It provides insightful guidance 
for creating SCI using soft robots as a medium and 
demonstrates the feasibility of this approach through 
five practical examples, spanning from analysis to 
fabrication to application. The Metaphor Ring method 
is not limited to plant motions, it can also be applied 
to the characteristics exhibited by any organisms in 
nature. Further research can explore the characteristics 
of other organisms and their associated semantics 
and useful information types, thus constructing a 
metaphorical semantic library. The semantic library of 
Metaphor Ring holds potential for future applications 
in affective computing. It leverages the motions and 
features observed in natural organisms to design 
feedback for machines, enabling personalized modes 
of expression while effectively conveying specific 
information.
Moreover, in field of peripheral interaction the designer 
can find the corresponding plant motion to build 
feedback for intended information, it subtly implies a 
connection between the feedback and the information 
further more it can broaden the type of information that 
could be conveyed in a peripheral way. 
However, as a novel method, the Metaphor Ring still 
need to be validated through practical design cases. In 
design practice, the correspondence between input and 
feedback context should be considered, and user testing 
is necessary to verify the effectiveness of information 
conveying. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This project was supervised by Prof. Judith Glaser, 
Prof. Thomas Ness and Prof. Dr. Lucy Norris. And with 
thanks to all those involved in advising and mentoring.
REFERENCES 
[1] Isabel P. S. Qamar, Katarzyna Stawarz, Si-
mon Robinson, Alix Goguey, Céline Coutrix, 
and Anne Roudaut. 2020. Morphino. Proceed-
ings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference (2020). DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/3357236.3395453
[2] Don Norman. 2016. The design of everyday things. 
http://doi.org/10.15358/9783800648108
[3] Dee Reynolds and Matthew Reason. 2012. Kines-
thetic empathy in creative and cultural practices. 
Intellect, Bristol. 
[4] Kensho Miyoshi. 2020. Designing objects in mo-
tion. exploring kinaesthetic empathy. Birkhäuser 
Verlag AG, Basel. 
[5] Thomas D. Erickson. 1995. Working with interface 
metaphors. Readings in Human–Computer Inter-
action: 65–73. http://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-
051574-8.50018-2 
[6] Katherine E. Bishop, David Higgins, and Jerry 
Määttä. 2020. Plants in science fiction: Speculative 
vegetation. University of Wales Press, Cardiff.
[7] Jason Alexander, Anne Roudaut, Jürgen Steimle, 
Kasper Hornbæk, Miguel Bruns Alonso, Sean 
Follmer, and Timothy Merritt. 2018. Grand Chal-
lenges in Shape-Changing Interface Research. Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (2018). DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173873
[8] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development 
Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi” 
for Soft Robotics. Extended Abstracts of the 
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (2021). DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[9] Anna Kumpan. 2021. Zimmerpflanze. Unplash. Re-
trieved December 15, 2023 from https://unsplash.
com/de/fotos/rote-blatter-in-der-tilt-shift-linse-
fAZCwvj95bc
[10] Lining Yao, Ryuma Niiyama, Jifei Ou, Sean 
Follmer, Clark Della Silva, and Hiroshi Ishii. 
2013. PneUI. Proceedings of the 26th an-
nual ACM symposium on User interface soft-
ware and technology (2013). DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/2501988.2502037
[11] Marcelo Coelho, Hiroshi Ishii, and Pattie Maes. 
2008. Surflex. CHI (2008). DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/1358628.1358869
[12] Fabian Hemmert, Susann Hamann, Matthias 
Löwe, Anne Wohlauf, and Gesche Joost. 2010. 
Shape-changing mobiles. Proceedings of the fourth 
international conference on Tangible, embedded, 
and embodied interaction (2010). DOI:https://doi.
org/10.1145/1709886.1709936
[13] Seoktae Kim, Hyunjung Kim, Boram Lee, Tek-Jin 
Nam, and Woohun Lee. 2008. Inflatable mouse. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (2008). DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357090
[14] Zhenyu Xu, Yongsen Zhou, Baoping Zhang, Chao 
Zhang, Jianfeng Wang, and Zuankai Wang. 2021. 
Recent Progress on Plant-Inspired Soft Robotics 
with Hydrogel Building Blocks: Fabrication, Actua-
tion and Application. Micromachines 12, 6 (2021), 
608. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3390/mi12060608
[15] Fabrizio Putzu, Taqi Abrar, and Kaspar Althoefer. 
2018. Plant-Inspired Soft Pneumatic Eversion 
Robot. 2018 7th IEEE International Conference 
on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics 
(Biorob) (2018). DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/
biorob.2018.8487848
[16] Giacomo Rizzolatti and Laila Craighero. 2004. 
THE MIRROR-NEURON SYSTEM. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience 27, 1 (2004), 169-192. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neu -
ro.27.070203.144230
[17] Ishii, H. and Ullmer, B. 1997. ‘Tangible bits’, 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on 
Human factors in computing systems [Preprint]. 
doi:10.1145/258549.258715.
[18] Eric Langrognet. 2019. Blumenbilder. Unplash. 
Retrieved December 15, 2023 from https://un -
splash.com/de/fotos/rosafarbene-blutenblatter-
hXvCujTY2T0 
[19] K.E. MacLean. Designing with haptic feedback. 
Proceedings 2000 ICRA. Millennium Confer -
ence. IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
and Automation. Symposia Proceedings (Cat. 
No.00CH37065). http://doi.org/10.1109/ro -
bot.2000.844146 
[20] Zhang, R. Tactkit. TactKit. https://tactkit.web -
flow.io/(Accessed: 31 July 2023).