phloSAR: a Portable, High-Flow Pressure Supply and Regulator
Enabling Untethered Operation of Large Pneumatic Soft Robots
Maxwell Ahlquist*, Rianna Jitosho*, Jiawen Bao, and Allison M. Okamura
Abstract— Pneumatic actuation benefits soft robotics by
facilitating compliance, enabling large volume change, and
concentrating actuator weight away from the end-effector.
However, portability is compromised when pneumatic actuators
are tethered to cumbersome air and power supplies. While
there are existing options for portable pneumatic systems,
they are limited in dynamic capabilities, constraining their
applicability to low pressure and/or small-volume soft robots. In
this work, we propose a portable, high-flow pressure supply and
regulator (phloSAR) for use in untethered, weight-constrained,
dynamic soft robot applications. PhloSAR leverages high-
flow proportional valves, an integrated pressure reservoir, and
Venturi vacuum generation to achieve portability and dynamic
performance. We present a set of models that describe the
system dynamics, experimentally validate them on physical
hardware, and discuss the influence of design parameters
on system operation. Lastly, we integrate a proof-of-concept
prototype with a soft robot arm mounted on an aerial vehicle to
demonstrate the system’s applicability to mobile robotics. Our
system enables new opportunities in mobile soft robotics by
making untethered pneumatic supply and regulation available
to a wider range of soft robots.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Soft robots exhibit passive adaptation to their environment,
enabling inherent safety and robustness. Pneumatic actuation
is a common choice for soft robots as it facilitates compliance
and large volume change while relocating actuator mass
away from the end-effector. However, pneumatic soft robots
(PSRs) require a method for pressure generation and regu-
lation, and many of these robots rely on pneumatic tubing
that tethers them to heavy air compressors [1]. Meanwhile,
untethered PSRs leverage methods such as micro pumps [2]–
[6], syringe displacement systems [7], CO2 gas cartridges [8],
[9], and chemical reactions [10]. However, these untethered
solutions are intended for PSRs with smaller volumes or low-
flow requirements. While untethered pneumatic solutions
exist for larger PSRs [11], [12], this comes at the cost
of added size and weight, limiting their suitability in PSR
applications with stringent payload limits (e.g., soft aerial
manipulation).
In this work, we address the limitations of existing solu-
tions regarding performance and portability with a portable,
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF)
grant 2024247, an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, the U.S. Department
of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration, Office of Defense
Nuclear Nonproliferation Research and Development (DNN R&D) under
subcontract from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; and the United
States Federal Bureau of Investigation contract 15F06721C0002306.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University. Email:
{ahlquist, rjitosho, jiawenb, aokamura }@stanford.edu
Control Volume
2L Reservoir
Flow Valve (EVP)
Pressure Sensor
Solenoid Valve
Venturi  Pump
Flow Valve (DVP)
5 cm
Environment
On/Off ValveEnvironment
Fig. 1. We present phloSAR, a portable high-flow pressure supply and
regulator to enable untethered operation of large pneumatic soft robots. (a)
PhloSAR prototype. (b) PhloSAR components and direction of airflow. (c)
The prototype is integrated with an aerial vehicle and actuates a soft “vine”
robot to demonstrate the phloSAR portability and that it can be used to
realize mobile soft robots. (d) Mass distribution (chart values in kg). “Flow
Control” includes the valves and Venturi pump, “Pneumatics” includes the
reservoir and pneumatic connections, “Structure” includes the chassis and
mounting hardware, and “Drone Integration” includes the vine robot and
additional mounting hardware. The phloSAR mass is 0.84 kg. The total
mass (phloSAR + soft robot) is 1.4 kg, which is within the drone payload
capacity (approximately 1.5 kg).
high-flow, pressure supply and regulator (phloSAR). It lever-
ages high-flow pneumatic components for high-speed pres-
sure regulation of large volumes, and it integrates a refillable
high-pressure air reservoir that enables untethered operation
of PSRs. This work provides the following contributions:
1) The design details of phloSAR, which uses high-flow
proportional valves, an integrated pressure reservoir,
and Venturi vacuum generation, enabling untethered
operation of large-volume pneumatic soft robots.
2) Models, verification, and guidelines that aid in the
design of future phloSARs for custom applications.
3) Implementation of a physical phloSAR prototype and a
demonstration on a mobile soft robot.
This work aims to be a design guide to aid in imple-
menting a phloSAR given a specific mobile PSR. As a
motivating example, the phloSAR implemented in this work
was customized for an inflated-beam “vine” robot [17].
These continuum robots grow in length via tip eversion
and often feature pneumatic actuation for bending [18].
Traditional vine robots operate from a base fixed in the
environment and require pneumatic tethering to heavy air
compressors [14], [19]. In this work, we demonstrate that a
vine robot with a phloSAR is portable enough to operate
arXiv:2403.01086v1  [cs.RO]  2 Mar 2024
Cost
Weight
Size
Customizability
Speed
Range/Resolution
Air Supply
Renewability
Micro Pump [2]–[6]
Syringe [7]
Cartrige [8], [9]
phloSAR [this work]
Off-the-shelf regulator [13], [14]
Custom Regulator via Flow Valves [2]–[6], [11], [15], [16]
Fig. 2. Qualitative comparison of existing pressure source and/or regu-
lation solutions. Metrics are written around the circumference, and higher
radii correspond with higher quality. Off-the-shelf regulators and custom
regulators as is are not ready for untethered operation (they must be paired
with a separate pressure source) and thus do not have quality values for
“Air Supply” and “Renewability”.
onboard an aerial vehicle, opening applications in aerial
manipulation not previously feasible for this class of soft
robot (Fig. 1).
II. D ESIGN CONSIDERATIONS AND PRIOR WORK
When considering pneumatic solutions for mobile soft
robots, three key design factors are its form, dynamic
performance, and amenability to untethered operation. For
form, we consider cost, weight, size, and customizability. For
dynamic performance, we consider speed of pressure change
and the output pressure range and resolution. For amenability
to untethered operation, we consider whether the solution
incorporates a portable pressure source, and whether the
choice of air supply impacts system redeployment or opera-
tion duration (which we term “renewability”). An overview
can be seen in Fig 2.
These design choices are inter-dependent, and the specific
balance of requirements will be informed by the PSR for
which the pneumatic system is intended.
A. Dynamic Performance Considerations
A pneumatic soft robot or actuator can be considered as a
sealed volume requiring pressure regulation; this paper uses
the general term “control volume” (CV). To understand the
dynamics of pressurizing an arbitrary control volume, we
consider the ideal gas law in its derivative form:
PcvVcv = ncvRuT → ˙Pcv = ρRuT
MVcv
Q, (1)
where ˙Pcv is the rate of pressure increase of the CV , Q is the
standard volumetric flow rate into the CV ,Ru is the universal
gas constant, ncv is the number of gas moles in the CV , andρ,
T , M, are the density, temperature, and molar mass of air at
standard conditions, respectively. From this relationship, we
see that high-speed CV pressurization requires a high-flow
(high Q) regulator. To understand the factors that determine
flow rate, we consider Ohm’s Law of fluid flow:
∆P = QRv, (2)
where ∆P is pressure difference across a valve and Rv is the
effective flow resistance across a valve (units can be derived
from dimensional analysis). In the context of pressure supply
and regulation, a pneumatic system with strong dynamic
performance features a large pressure difference between the
pressure supply and CV ( ∆P) and operates with a small flow
resistance (Rv).
B. Untethered Pressure Sources
Untethered operation of a PSR is typically dependent on
having a portable pressure source. The two main options for
this are (1) devices that generate airflow, and (2) pressure
reservoirs.
A common device for generating airflow for untethered
PSRs is a micropump [2]–[6], [12]. These devices exist in
small, lightweight form factors and can continuously supply
pressure as long as they have battery power. However, their
flow rate drops as pressure accumulates at the outlet, and they
have limited maximum flow rates up to approximately 10
standard liters per minute (SLPM). While these limitations
do not preclude small-volume PSR applications, they are
impractical for large-volume, high-speed PSR applications. A
second option for generating airflow are syringe methods [7],
which similarly suffer from limited flow rates in addition to
having a small total capacity.
Air reservoirs can achieve higher pressure gradients but
inherently have a limited operable duration. For a fixed
mass of air, choosing a reservoir involves a tradeoff between
the size, weight, and reservoir pressure. Single-use CO 2
cartridges are compact options that contain pressures up to
approximately 6000 kPa [8], [9]. However, this comes with
practical challenges such as having to manually replace the
canister after each use, sourcing components for the regulator
that can withstand such a high inlet pressure, and preventing
regulator “freeze up”. A lower-pressure or smaller reservoir
can be made viable by incorporating a portable air com-
pressor [11] that refills the reservoir, but using a compressor
increases system weight, size, and cost, and using a lower-
pressure reservoir reduces dynamic performance.
The phloSAR strikes a balance between these methods. It
features an air reservoir at a moderate pressure (690 kPa),
which facilitates dynamic performance while offering enough
capacity to eliminate the need for an onboard compressor.
C. Methods for Pressure Regulation
Off-the-shelf pressure regulators make different trade-
offs in performance, portability, and cost. An off-the-shelf
regulator reduces complexity by handling feedback control
internally, but requires a pressure source that satisfies the
inlet specifications of the regulator.
Alternatively, a pressure regulator can be custom-built
by leveraging closed-loop control of flow valve arrays (bi-
nary solenoid valves and/or proportional valves) to achieve
pressure regulation. This is a common strategy in existing
untethered pneumatic systems [2]–[6], [11], [15]. Building
a custom regulator with flow valves provides flexibility in
that the designer selects regulator components jointly with
the pressure source. Additionally, flow valves tend to be less
bulky, heavy, and expensive than off-the-shelf pressure regu-
lators, and they can operate at higher inlet pressures, making
them amenable to use with high-pressure air supplies.
PhloSAR implements pressure regulation via flow control
but is intended for dynamic operation of large-volume PSRs,
which have higher flow requirements than many of the
systems in prior works.
III. D ESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
We discuss design decisions for implementing a phloSAR
for a specific PSR, but the design is highly customizable in
that components can be readily swapped to achieve different
performance specifications as needed.
A. Flow Modulation
Airflow in and out of the CV is modulated with pro-
portional valves that have an affine relationship between
flow and input current (Clippard “EVP” EC-P-05-25-A0
and “DVP” DV-PM-10-670100-V). The use of proportional
valves, and the Clippard valves in particular, offers several
benefits. First, they offer large maximum flow rates (EVP:
23.5 SLPM; DVP: 67.0 SLPM), which enables dynamic per-
formance. Second, they allow the use of high inlet pressures
(up to 690 kPa for the chosen valves). This allows the use
of high-pressure reservoirs that are directly connected to the
valve inlet, eliminating the need for intermediate components
that would add weight and design complexity. Third, they are
small and lightweight (EVP: 52 mm, 77 g; DVP: 64 mm,
139 g), which is critical for portability.
B. Pressure Reservoir
A high-pressure air reservoir allows for higher flow rates
(Eq. 2) and a longer operation time due to the increased
amount of air stored (ideal gas law). Larger reservoirs
similarly allow longer operations times but there exists a
trade off between portability and operation time. In the
implemented prototype, we use a 2-liter bottle made from
polyethylene terephthalate (PET). This reservoir choice is
lightweight (70 g), low-cost (<$1), and readily available (e.g.
2L soda bottle), and can withstand pressures over 900 kPa.
We integrate a pneumatic fitting with the reservoir cap for
routing tubing to the flow valves and to a manual on/off
valve for refilling. The reservoir is easily refilled by opening
the on/off valve and supplying compressed air. While it is
the largest component of the implemented prototype (30 cm
long), the large volume allows for more storage capacity.
C. Vacuum Source
Passive venting to atmosphere or the use of vacuum pumps
are simple solutions for decreasing CV pressure, but they
suffer from limited pressure gradients and flow rates that
reduce dynamic performance. Instead, the phloSAR design
generates a vacuum with a Venturi pump (Coval VR09f14)
that enables higher flow rates out of the CV . A Venturi pump
is also advantageous in that it is pneumatically driven by the
same pressure reservoir used for inflation. Specifically, high-
velocity flow through the Venturi pump, from the inlet to the
exhaust port, generates vacuum at a third port. This Venturi
effect is used to actively draw air from CV , which is also
released through the exhaust port.
D. Operation and Controls
The phloSAR controller coordinates commands to multi-
ple valves to modulate airflow for CV pressure regulation.
The first valve, the EVP, modulates flow from the reservoir
into the CV . The second valve, the DVP, modulates flow from
the reservoir into the Venturi pump. The third valve, a binary
solenoid valve (Shenzhen Huamei Technology Co.), enables
flow out of the CV and into the vacuum port of the Venturi
pump. During inflation, the phloSAR modulates flow into the
CV by actuating the EVP, and during deflation, the phloSAR
modulates flow out of the CV by coordinating actuation of
the DVP and solenoid valve. Actuating the solenoid valve
alone allows passive venting from the CV , and actuating the
DVP in tandem enables active deflation.
The valves are actuated with an L298N motor driver
with commands from a Teensy LC microcontroller. The
microcontroller uses pressure feedback from the CV
and pressure reservoir (Honeywell pressure sensors ABP-
DANN030PGAA5 and ABPDANN015BGAA5) to deter-
mine the appropriate command. For low tracking errors, we
use a PID controller. For high tracking errors, an on-off con-
troller sends commands to maximize flow rate. The tracking
error cutoff used to select between the two controllers (1 kPa)
was determined empirically. During deflation, the phloSAR
selects between passive venting and active deflation, only
leveraging active deflation when additional speed is required.
This improves air-use efficiency.
IV. S YSTEM DYNAMICS
While we implement one example phloSAR, the design
is highly customizable and intended to be adapted for other
mobile PSRs. Here we provide models of system dynamics
that give insight into phloSAR performance that can be used
for designing other implementations of phloSAR.
A. Pressure Reservoir Discharge
Under constant operation, a pressure reservoir has a finite
operation time before depletion. We provide a simple model
based on the ideal gas law and Ohm’s fluid law in Eq. 2 to
capture reservoir pressure over time:
Pr(t) = Pr,0e− t
τdis , (3)
where τdis = RvVr
α and α = ρRuT
M . Pr,0 is the initial pressure, Vr
is the reservoir volume, and Rv is the flow resistance across
the reservoir outlet valve. The model assumes the reservoir
is discharging to atmosphere through a valve with constant
flow resistance. In practice, the reservoir discharges to a CV ,
which is typically at a higher pressure than atmosphere, and
the flow resistance can be modulated, but this model can be
used to provide a conservative estimate of operation time
by setting the model resistance to the minimum value for
the implemented phloSAR. This model is also conservative
because during real operation reservoir discharge halts when
CV pressure stabilizes around the commanded pressure. In
addition, reservoir discharge during CV deflation is more ef-
ficient than CV inflation because the phloSAR leverages both
passive venting and active deflation, so the air discharged as
motive fluid for the Venturi pump is, on average, less than
the air vented from the CV .
B. Inflation Speed
The time-rate at which the CV’s pressure can be changed
serves as a benchmark for the dynamic performance of a par-
ticular phloSAR setup. Assuming a high-pressure reservoir
relative to the CV ( Pr ≫ Pcv), we derive the following from
Eq. 1 and 2: ˙Pcv = αPr
RvVcv
(4)
This model is intended to aid in component selection for
a phloSAR implementation. The size of the control volume
Vcv depends on the PSR application, but the reservoir
pressure ( Pr) and flow resistance ( Rv) can be adjusted
based on the choice of reservoir and proportional valve by
the designer. Pr decreases as the reservoir is depleted; we
provide addition discussion in Sec. VI-B.
C. Frequency Response
To model phloSAR frequency response, we consider a
sinusoidal command and compute the maximum derivative:
Pcmd(t) = Asin(2πω t) +c → ˙Pcmd,max = 2Aπω , (5)
where A is the command amplitude and c is a constant
offset. For a phloSAR with a maximum inflation speed,
˙Pcv,max, larger than ˙Preq,max, the phloSAR tracks the command
with unity gain. If ˙Pcv,max is less than ˙Preq,max, we make a
simplifying assumption that the phloSAR exhibits sinusoidal
behavior with a maximum slope ˙Pcv,max. This can be used to
solve for the output gain. This yields the following model for
the phloSAR frequency response and cutoff frequency ωc:
G(ω) =

1 ω ≤ ωcωc
ω ω > ωc
(6)
ωc =
˙Pcv,max
2πA (Hz) (7)
This model shows that phloSAR bandwidth is affected
by its PSR application. Specifically, A is influenced by the
magnitudes of pressure required by the PSR, and ˙Pcv depends
on the CV and phloSAR setup used (Eq. 4).
V. E XPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION
Here we verify each model presented in Sec. IV.
A. Pressure Reservoir Discharge Verification
Equation 3 is verified with discharge tests that use the
following procedure: fill a reservoir to an initial pressure,
open an outlet valve at constant flow resistance, and monitor
the reservoir pressure (Pr) over time. We performed discharge
tests with varied initial reservoir pressure ( Pr,0), reservoir
volumes (Vcv), and flow resistances ( Rv), and compared the
measured and modeled pressures over time with the nRMSE
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
200
400
600
Time (s)
Reservoir Pressure [ Pr] (kPa)
Measured (4L Vr, High Rv)
Model (4L Vr, High Rv)
Measured (4L Vr, Low Rv)
Model (4L Vr, Low Rv)
Measured (2L Vr, Low Rv)
Model (2L Vr, Low Rv)
Fig. 3. Characterization of pressure reservoir discharge (singular trials)
through a valve with constant flow resistance. We compare experimental
data to the model presented in Sec. IV-A for different initial reservoir
pressures, reservoir sizes, and flow resistances. The tests shown represent the
conditions with shortest and longest duration and one intermediate example.
shown in Fig. 3. The nRMSE for the displayed tests are in
the range 4.1-5.7% (normalized with respect to Pr,0), which
suggests that reservoir discharge is captured well by Eq. 3.
B. Inflation Speed Verification
We verify Eq 4 by analyzing the step response of the
phloSAR prototype. We model the response as a piece-wise
linear function, in which the pressure increases linearly ac-
cording to Eq. 4 and then remains constant after reaching the
target pressure. We collect experimental data for 3 different
test conditions (TC) to show varying inflation speeds:
TC1: ∆Pcv = 69 kPa, Vcv = 0.5 L, Pr = 689 kPa
TC2: ∆Pcv = 34 kPa, Vcv = 1 L, Pr = 689 kPa
TC3: ∆Pcv = 21 kPa, Vcv = 1 L, Pr = 345 kPa
The CVs used were rigid containers.
From Fig. 4, we see that a piecewise linear function for
the phloSAR step response captures the behavior well. The
nRMSE between the measured and modeled time series,
normalized by the commanded pressure, is 2.3%, 10.9%,
and 12.9%, for TC1, TC2, and TC3 respectively. For each
test, we also compute the average rate of pressure increase
and compare it to the rate of change given by Eq. 4. The
normalized errors for the three tests, normalized by the model
speed, are 0.24%, 44.8%, and 45.0%, for TC1, TC2, and TC3
respectively. In future work, we will explore what causes
deviation from the model for larger control volumes. We also
note the prioritization of inflation speed, which sometimes
caused overshoot (e.g. TC1). We anticipate this could be
resolved with further controller design and tuning.
C. Frequency Response Verification
We verify Eq. 6 by analyzing the phloSAR’s pressure
output in response to sinusoidal pressure commands with
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
20
40
60
Time (s)
Control V olume
Pressure [Pcv] (kPa)
Measured (TC1)
Model (TC1)
Measured (TC2)
Model (TC2)
Measured (TC3)
Model (TC3)
Fig. 4. Comparing PhloSAR step response with the model (piecewise linear
with an initial inflation speed given by Eq. 4). The pressure command,
phloSAR reservoir pressure, and control volume size were varied (TC1,
TC2, TC3) to yield different inflation speeds.
10−1 100 101
10−1
100
Frequency (Hz)
Gain Measured (TC4)
Model (TC4)
Measured (TC5)
Model (TC5)
Baseline 1
Baseline 2
Fig. 5. Comparison of phloSAR closed-loop frequency response to the
model presented in Sec. IV-C. Test condition TC4 is a phloSAR and control
volume within expected operating conditions, and test condition TC5 is a
more difficult condition (lower reservoir pressure, larger control volume, and
higher-amplitude pressure command). The frequency response of a baseline
(off-the-shelf pressure regulator) is overlaid. Baselines 1 and 2 correspond
to TC4 and TC5, except the baseline regulator is supplied with its maximum
recommended inlet pressure in both cases. Error bars represent 1 standard
deviation, and bars not shown are within the bounds of the marker.
offset c such that Pcmd, min = 0 kPa (Fig. 5). We consider
two test conditions, one with expected operating conditions
(TC4) and a second with more extreme conditions (TC5),
specifically, a higher amplitude pressure command, larger
CV , and lower pressure reservoir:
TC4: A = 21 kPa, Vcv = 0.5 L, Pr = 689 kPa
TC5: A = 34 kPa, Vcv = 1 L, Pr = 345 kPa
For each condition, we measure the phloSAR response for
a wide range of command frequencies. To compute the gain
for a given trial, a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is applied to
the phloSAR’s pressure time response, and the magnitude at
the command frequency is isolated. We used a fixed pressure
source of 690 kPa to eliminate the effect of changing Pr on
frequency response.
We compare the measured frequency response to the
model from Eq. 6, using a measured value for ˙Pcv,max. Both
test conditions show qualitative agreement between the mod-
eled and measured frequency response. Although the roll-
off rate deviates from the model for the highest frequencies
ranges, this is beyond the intended operating bandwidth as
these frequencies are much higher than the cutoff frequency.
The modeled and measured cutoff frequency for TC4 is 1.35
and 1.6 Hz, respectively, and the modeled and measured
cutoff frequency for TC5 is 0.32 and 0.22 Hz, respectively.
Figure 5 also provides a qualitative “baseline” comparison
with one of the off-the-shelf regulators from Fig. 2 (Propor-
tion Air QB3TANKKZP6PSG) commonly used to actuate
vine robots [14], [20]. However, the baseline regulator is not
suited for untethered operation because it does not have an
integrated pressure source. Baseline 1 and 2 correspond to
TC4 and TC5, except the parameter for reservoir pressure is
not applicable. Instead, the baseline regulator is supplied with
its maximum recommended inlet pressure. The phloSAR has
better performance than the baseline at expected operating
conditions (TC4) and worse performance at more extreme
conditions (TC5); this is expected when operating outside
0 1 2 3
0
20
40
60
Time (s)
CV Pressure [ Pcv] (kPa)
Command phloSAR Output
phloSAR Output (Low Pr) Baseline Regulator Output
Fig. 6. Time series data for a 1.2 Hz pressure command. Comparison
of phloSAR output with a “baseline” off-the-shelf regulator, as well as
phloSAR output when the reservoir pressure is too low. The peak-to-peak
measure of the command is 34 kPa, and the approximate peak-to-peak
measure of the phloSAR, low Pr phloSAR, and baseline is 32, 20, and
6 kPa, respectively, demonstrating the higher dynamic performance of the
phloSAR compared to the baseline.
intended conditions.
Figure 6 provides time-cropped segments from trials with
a 1.2 Hz pressure command to visualize the difference
in performance for a phloSAR and the baseline regulator.
We also overlay the response of a phloSAR with low
reservoir pressure to show behavior when operating outside
of intended conditions. The peak-to-peak measure of the
command is 34 kPa, and the approximate peak-to-peak
measure of the phloSAR, low Pr phloSAR, and baseline
is 32, 20, and 6 kPa, respectively. This demonstrates the
higher dynamic performance of the phloSAR compared to
the baseline. As a result, phloSAR exhibits the best tracking
performance, although when the reservoir pressure is too low
(Low Pr), the inflation speed is not high enough to track the
command. The baseline suffers from slow response times and
low inflation speeds leading to poor tracking performance.
VI. I NFLUENCE OF DESIGN PARAMETERS ON
SYSTEM OPERATION
Here we synthesize findings from our work to serve as a
guideline when implementing a phloSAR.
A. Designing for Performance
The high-level insights from Secs. IV-B and IV-C are
that maximizing phloSAR dynamic ability can be achieved
through:
1) Maximizing starting reservoir pressure ( Pr,0)
2) Minimizing minimum flow resistance ( Rv,min) when
sourcing proportional flow valves
3) Minimizing volume ( Vcv) and pressure difference be-
tween “on” and “off” states (∆Pcv) of the CV (e.g. PSR
actuators).
However, this needs to be considered jointly with cost, size,
and weight considerations of the phloSAR, and performance
requirements of the PSR.
B. Designing for Operation Duration
The discharge model in Sec. IV-A gives a sense of
operable duration, and we supplement this with a metric for
the number of CV inflation-deflation cycles ( ncycles) that can
be achieved for a given phloSAR and setup.
Given a target inflation speed, ˙Pcv,d, and the change in
pressure during inflation, ∆Pcv, there is a minimum reservoir
pressure for the phloSAR to satisfy the target inflation speed
(Eq. 4). For a specific reservoir volume and initial pressure,
we can compute the quantity of air that can be supplied
before reaching this minimum pressure. Additionally, for
a specific CV ( Vcv), we can compute the quantity of air
required per inflation-deflation cycle. These quantities can
be related to yield
ncycles = 1
2
Pr,0
Vcv
− Rv,min ˙Pcv,d
α
 Vr
∆Pcv
, (8)
which gives the number of inflation-deflation cycles possible
while satisfying the PSR’s dynamic specification. For sim-
plicity, the model conservatively assumes the quantity of air
required by the Venturi pump during deflation is the same
as the air required by the CV during inflation.
VII. D EMONSTRATION
The aim of this work is to enable untethered operation of
soft robots. To demonstrate this, we use the phloSAR proto-
type to inflate the bending actuator of a vine robot mounted
to an aerial vehicle. We envision that these “Flying Vines”
could be used in hard-to-access areas at high altitude, for
example in bridge inspection [21] or canopy sampling [22].
Fig. 1 shows the proof-of-concept assembly in flight and a
visualization of mass distribution. The aerial vehicle features
a Lumenier QA V-PRO Frame with 12.7 cm propellers and
RaceSpec 2300 kv brushless motors (RaceSpec RS2205).
The vehicle consumes approximately 1-2 kW of power
with a payload of approximately 1.5 kg; however, larger
aerial vehicles with longer flight duration may also be used.
Meanwhile, the phloSAR consumes 3 W and weighs 0.84 kg,
a comparable mass to that of an off-the-shelf regulator. For
example, the QB3 regulator commonly used for vine robots is
0.68 kg, but it does not include a pressure source or electronic
hardware for sending pressure commands. During testing, the
phloSAR inflated a 0.1 L bending actuator to 20.7 kPa at
0.55 Hz. We did not test the maximum number of inflation
cycles, but about 30 cycles were performed during testing,
and Eq. 8 predicts more than 300 cycles.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We present a portable air supply and pressure regulator
that enables untethered operation of soft robots with high-
flow requirements. We provide models (verified on hardware)
that aid in selecting system components based soft robot
requirements. We implement a phloSAR for a “vine” robot,
and demonstrate that it is portable enough to be mounted
on an aerial vehicle. Our findings show that phloSARs can
enable untethered operation of pneumatic soft robots, which
can lead to novel soft robot applications. In the future, we
plan to develop higher-fidelity dynamic models for more
accurate component specification and explore options for
onboard reservoir re-pressurization.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors thank Ian Scholl for helpful discussions, and
Jun En Low and Keiko Nagami for assistance with drones.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Jumet, M. D. Bell, V . Sanchez, and D. J. Preston, “A data-driven
review of soft robotics,” Advanced Intelligent Systems , vol. 4, no. 4,
2022.
[2] A. Shtarbanov, “FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic
“Raspberry Pi” for Soft Robotics,” in Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems , no. 479, 2021.
[3] M. Marcin, “Building a fluidic control board,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://marcin.website/blog/building pneumatic control/
[4] D. P. Holland, E. J. Park, P. Polygerinos, G. J. Bennett, and C. J.
Walsh, “The Soft Robotics Toolkit: Shared Resources for Research
and Design,” Soft Robotics, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 224–230, 2014.
[5] V . Oguntosin, “Low cost Electro-pneumatic circuit for Soft
Robots — Soft Robotics Toolkit,” 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://softroboticstoolkit.com/low-cost-ep-circuit
[6] A. Shrivastava, “Programmable Air,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.programmableair.com/
[7] Y . Wu, “Syringe Control System,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.yufengwu.com/research/soft-robotics/syringe-control-system
[8] A. D. Marchese, C. D. Onal, and D. Rus, “Towards a self-contained
soft robotic fish: On-board pressure generation and embedded electro-
permanent magnet valves,” in International Symposium on Experimen-
tal Robotics, 2013, pp. 41–54.
[9] D. Drotman, S. Jadhav, D. Sharp, C. Chan, and M. T. Tol-
ley, “Electronics-free pneumatic circuits for controlling soft-legged
robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 6, no. 51, 2021.
[10] M. T. Tolley, R. F. Shepherd, M. Karpelson, N. W. Bartlett, K. C.
Galloway, M. Wehner, R. Nunes, G. M. Whitesides, and R. J. Wood,
“An untethered jumping soft robot,” in International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2014, pp. 561–566.
[11] T. Proietti, C. O’Neill, L. Gerez, T. Cole, S. Mendelowitz, K. Nuckols,
C. Hohimer, D. Lin, S. Paganoni, and C. Walsh, “Restoring arm
function with a soft robotic wearable for individuals with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis,” Science Translational Medicine , vol. 15, no. 681,
2023.
[12] M. T. Tolley, R. F. Shepherd, B. Mosadegh, K. C. Galloway,
M. Wehner, M. Karpelson, R. J. Wood, and G. M. Whitesides, “A
resilient, untethered soft robot,” Soft Robotics, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 213–
223, 2014.
[13] D. A. Haggerty, M. J. Banks, E. Kamenar, A. B. Cao, P. C. Curtis,
I. Mezi ´c, and E. W. Hawkes, “Control of soft robots with inertial
dynamics,” Science Robotics, vol. 8, no. 81, 2023.
[14] M. M. Coad, L. H. Blumenschein, S. Cutler, J. A. R. Zepeda,
N. D. Naclerio, H. El-Hussieny, U. Mehmood, J.-H. Ryu, E. W.
Hawkes, and A. M. Okamura, “Vine robots: Design, teleoperation,
and deployment for navigation and exploration,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Magazine, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 120–132, 2020.
[15] A. Sinha, “Pneumatic Controller,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://hdcl.mechanical.illinois.edu/open-source-materials/
exo-test-bed/pneumatic-controller/
[16] F. Heibeck, J. Ou, B. Xu, and H. Ishii, “Pneuduino,” 2015. [Online].
Available: http://pneuduino.org/
[17] E. W. Hawkes, L. H. Blumenschein, J. D. Greer, and A. M. Okamura,
“A soft robot that navigates its environment through growth,” Science
Robotics, vol. 2, no. 8, 2017.
[18] L. H. Blumenschein, M. M. Coad, D. A. Haggerty, A. M. Okamura,
and E. W. Hawkes, “Design, modeling, control, and application of
everting vine robots,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol. 7, pp. 90–
113, 2020.
[19] P. A. der Maur, B. Djambazi, Y . Haberth ¨ur, P. H ¨ormann, A. K ¨ubler,
M. Lustenberger, S. Sigrist, O. Vigen, J. F ¨orster, F. Achermann,
E. Hampp, R. K. Katzschmann, and R. Siegwart, “Roboa: Construc-
tion and evaluation of a steerable vine robot for search and rescue
applications,” in International Conference on Soft Robotics , 2021, pp.
15–20.
[20] A. M. K ¨ubler, S. U. Rivera, F. B. Raphael, J. F ¨orster, R. Siegwart, and
A. M. Okamura, “A multi-segment, soft growing robot with selective
steering,” in International Conference on Soft Robotics, 2023, pp. 1–7.
[21] A. Jimenez-Cano, G. Heredia, and A. Ollero, “Aerial manipulator with
a compliant arm for bridge inspection,” in International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems , 2017, pp. 1217–1222.
[22] J. R. Kutia, K. A. Stol, and W. Xu, “Aerial manipulator interac-
tions with trees for canopy sampling,” Transactions on Mechatronics,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1740–1749, 2018.