Wear+Touch: An Exploration of Wearables for Vibrotactile
Feedback During Touchscreen Input
Mihail Terenti and Radu-Daniel Vatavu
MintViz Lab, MANSiD Research Center, S ¸tefan cel Mare University of Suceava
13 Universitatii, 720229 Suceava, Romania
AR TICLE HISTOR Y
Compiled July 9, 2024
ABSTRACT
Vibrotactile feedback is known to have a positive impact on the user performance
and experience of touchscreen input. Unfortunately, not all touchscreen devices have
built-in haptics capabilities, public displays being a notable example, while the de-
sign options for vibrotactile feedback on conventional mobile devices, such as smart-
phones and tablets, are still limited. In this work, we propose leveraging commodity
wearable devices, such as smartwatches, rings, and armbands, to enable vibrotactile
feedback as closely as possible to the touch point when the touchscreen does not
natively support haptics, and to complement existing haptics capabilities when the
touchscreen already features them. To this end, we introduce Wear+Touch, a set of
four interaction techniques designed to augment touchscreen input with vibrations
delivered through wearable devices, from substituting to complementing, extending,
and expanding on-screen vibrotactile feedback. We demonstrate Wear+Touch with
several practical implementations involving a large touchscreen display, smartphone,
tablet, smartwatch, smart ring, and armband as well as a custom wearable device
that we designed for vibrations delivered simultaneously on the user’s index finger,
wrist, and forearm. We also report empirical results from two controlled experiments
involving a total of 40 participants, conducted to understand the multi-faceted user
experience of vibrotactile feedback delivered through the Wear+Touch techniques.
In the first experiment, we reveal a favorable user experience of vibrations delivered
on the index finger, wrist, and forearm, in this order, when the touchscreen lacks
haptics capabilities. In the second experiment, we reveal benefits of reinforcing and
expanding on-screen vibrations with vibrotactile feedback on the index finger, wrist,
and arm, respectively. We use our findings to suggest future work opportunities for
combined vibrotactile feedback involving both touchscreens and wearable devices.
KEYWORDS
Touch input; wearables; vibrotactile feedback; touchscreens; watches; rings;
armbands; haptics
1. Introduction
Touchscreens are commonplace, from small personal devices, such as smartphones and
tablets, to large interactive ambient displays in public places. Touchscreens maximize
the input surface to their entire screen real-estate, while favoring visual and auditory
content in the detriment of other feedback modalities. Among the latter, vibrotactile
feedback is known to provide many benefits to touchscreen input in terms of both
CONTACT Radu-Daniel Vatavu. Email: radu.vatavu@usm.ro
The Version of Record of this manuscript has been published and 
is available in the International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 
at https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2372145
Figure 1. Examples of Wear+Touch, where touchscreen input is augmented with complementary vibrotactile
feedback delivered by commodity wearables. Left: a user interacts with a large touchscreen display that has
no native support for vibrotactile feedback, but vibrations are delivered via an electronic ring on the finger
touching the screen. Middle: a user interacts with a smartphone with native support for vibrotactile feedback,
while a smartwatch augments on-screen with on-wrist vibrations to provide complementary information.Right:
vibrotactile feedback provided by a smartwatch supports eyes-free touch input.
user performance and experience (Terenti and Vatavu, 2022; Brewster et al., 2007;
Henderson et al., 2019; Dunlop and Taylor, 2009) but, unfortunately, is not always
available, e.g., it is not natively supported by large touchscreen displays. Although
several technical solutions have been proposed in the scientific literature to overcome
this drawback (Maeda et al., 2016; Krol et al., 2009; Emgin et al., 2019; Bau et al.,
2010), the underlying technology is too complex yet for practical deployment.
In this context, we contend that a much simpler technical solution is readily avail-
able: using wearable devices to deliver vibrations on the user’s finger, hand, and fore-
arm, as closely as possible to the touch point, when the touchscreen does not have
built-in native support for vibrotactile feedback. Despite the growing adoption of wear-
able devices, this technical solution has been little explored in the scientific community,
either from the end user perspective (for example, to document users’ preferred lo-
cations where to receive vibrotactile feedback on the body during touchscreen input)
or the system perspective (such as software architecture design to enable integration
of off-the-shelf wearable devices for enhancing touchscreen input). We suspect that
technical advances have been limited so far in this space because of lacking scientific
examination of design possibilities involving both wearables and touchscreen devices
to be used conjointly for input and output, including the lack of a structured design
space. Nevertheless, such a technical solution may prove viable for numerous applica-
tions and interactive contexts involving both personal and public touchscreen displays.
In this context, we make the following contributions:
(1) We introduce Wear+Touch, a set of four interaction techniques leveraging wear-
able devices for the finger, wrist, and forearm to deliver vibrotactile feedback
on the arm used for touch input, as closely as possible to the touch point.
Wear+Touch provides structure in the space of conjoint use of wearables and
touchscreens from the perspective of the user experience (UX) of touch input
accompanied by vibrotactile feedback. Depending on the availability of native
2
vibrotactile feedback capabilities in the touchscreen device, we offer a structured
space with four design possibilities for Wear+Touch, of increasing expressive-
ness for end users, from addition to reinforcement, extension, and expansion of
on-screen vibrations.
(2) We demonstrate the utility of the Wear+Touch techniques with several practi-
cal applications and present implementations involving a variety of commodity
devices (large touchscreen display, smartphone, tablet, smartwatch, armband,
and smart ring) as well as demonstrations of Wear+Touch in new contexts of
use involving a custom-designed wearable device for synchronized vibrations de-
livered on the index finger, wrist, and forearm; see Figure 1 for representative
photographs of a few of our demonstrative applications.
(3) We report insights from a first experiment with a total number of twenty partic-
ipants regarding an evaluation of the user experience of substituting on-screen
vibrations with vibrotactile feedback delivered on the index finger, wrist, and
forearm through a wearable. Our results reveal a favorable user experience of
touch input compared to the implicit control condition of no vibrations, repre-
sentative of large touchscreen displays lacking haptics capabilities, when vibro-
tactile feedback is delivered on the finger, wrist, and forearm, in this order.
(4) We complement our findings with insights from a second experiment involv-
ing twenty new participants regarding the evaluation of the user experience of
on-screen vibrations vs. vibrotactile feedback delivered using the Wear+Touch
techniques. Our results reveal user experience benefits of reinforcing conven-
tional on-screen vibrations with vibrations on the index finger and, respectively,
expanding on-screen vibrations to the finger, wrist, and forearm.
2. Related W ork
The scope of our work is represented by wearable devices repurposed for augmenting
touchscreen input with complementary vibrotactile feedback. Thus, we position our
scientific and technical contributions in the context of previous research that has re-
ported benefits in terms of the user performance and user experience of vibrotactile
feedback accompanying touchscreen input in various contexts of use. We also overview
prior work that has explored and designed vibrotactile feedback delivered by wearable
devices for novel interactions involving touchscreens.
2.1. Augmenting Touchscreen Input with Vibrotactile Feedback
Vibrotactile feedback delivered during touchscreen input on mobile devices, such as
smartphones and tablets, is known to reduce error rates in generic touch target acquisi-
tion tasks (Henderson et al., 2019; Brewster et al., 2007) and improve user performance
in specific tasks, such as text entry (Hoggan et al., 2008; Dunlop and Taylor, 2009)
and dwell mode switching (Liao et al., 2017). Furthermore, by leveraging on-screen
vibrotactile feedback, the mobile device can sense identification information about the
touching fingers (Masson et al., 2017; Bianchi and Je, 2017). Vibrotactile feedback has
also been leveraged in mobile devices to increase the accessibility of touchscreen input
for users with visual impairments; see (Tekli et al., 2018; Tennison et al., 2020) for
specific examples and (Grussenmeyer and Folmer, 2017; Vatavu, 2017) for reviews on
3
accessible touchscreen technology and mobile interaction under visual impairments.
Unlike smartphones and tablets, however, large touchscreen devices, such as pub-
lic interactive ambient displays (Ardito et al., 2015), do not have native support for
vibrotactile feedback. Nevertheless, researchers have proposed various technical so-
lutions to augment touchscreen input for large displays with vibrotactile sensations.
For instance, Emgin et al.(2019) presented an electromechanical actuation technique
based on piezoelectric elements for adding haptic effects to static gesture input as well
as electrostatic actuation for dynamic gestures. Another example is Bau et al.(2010),
who used a 3M multitouch panel, provoking a periodic variation in force between the
finger and the screen, which was perceived by users as vibrotactile feedback at the
touch point. Besides on-screen vibrations, other researchers have leveraged input de-
vices conventionally used in conjunction with touchscreens, e.g., Poupyrev et al.(2004)
introduced a haptic display for pen-based interaction, where the pen delivered vibro-
tactile feedback. Other technology includes ultrasound for virtual displays (Monnai
et al., 2014; Long et al., 2014), varying the viscosity of the fluid located underneath
the display using a magnetic field (Jansen, 2010), and small electrostatic tactile dis-
plays for virtual reality applications (Yamamoto et al., 2006), respectively.
Despite being effective, these solutions are still too technically complex for practical
deployment into large touchscreen displays. In this context, turning to wearable devices
as a form of computing that has become mainstream, e.g., about one-in-five Americans
use a smartwatch or fitness tracker as of 2020 (Vogels, 2020), may represent a more
feasible technical approach in the short and mid term for augmenting touch input with
vibrotactile feedback for large displays. Next, we discuss related work about wearable
devices used for delivering vibrotactile feedback at various locations on the user’s body
in specific contexts of use.
2.2. Vibrotactile Feedback and Wearables
Prior work has examined wearables for vibrotactile feedback during touchscreen input,
but has either focused on aspects of user performance, e.g., the effect of vibrations on
touch accuracy, or on specific applications and contexts of use, e.g., vibrations deliv-
ered on the wrist by smartwatches. For instance, Henderson et al.(2019) compared
the effectiveness of touch input augmented with vibrotactile feedback at the touch
location on the screen and distal feedback delivered on the user’s non-dominant wrist
via a smartwatch. They showed that distal vibrotactile feedback achieved similar per-
formance characteristics in terms of time and error rate for touch target acquisition
as under-the-finger vibrotactile feedback provided through the smartphone. The user
experience of on-wrist vibrations has also been examined for complementing on-screen
vibrations for cross-device tablet and smartwatch interaction scenarios (Terenti et al.,
2024c) and for enhancing eyes-free input (Terenti et al., 2024a), respectively.
Other researchers have explored custom wearable designs and locations for on-body
vibrotactile feedback other than the wrist. One example is Sch¨ onauer et al.(2015),
who evaluated the effect of vibrotactile feedback delivered on the forearm to under-
stand aspects of user perception while performing touch and mid-air gestures. Stanke
et al.(2020) designed both ring and wristband devices to render electromechanical
and electrostatic vibrations on the finger and wrist, while Luzhnica and Veas(2018)
explored vibrotactile feedback at various locations on the user’s palm for skin-reading.
Several prototypes have been proposed in the scientific literature for on-finger tactile
output, such as Tacttoo (Withana et al., 2018), a feel-through interface integrated in
4
a temporary tattoo, which delivers electro-tactile output on various body parts, in-
cluding the fingertip; REVEL (Bau and Poupyrev, 2012), a technique that employs
reverse electrovibration, where a weak electrical signal creates an oscillating electrical
field around the user’s fingers; and SmartFinger (Ando et al., 2002), a tactile display
designed for the fingernail, which enables users to feel textures while tracing fingers
along a surface. Ubitile (Le et al., 2016), a finger-worn device for delivering vibrotac-
tile feedback, can be used for authoring custom vibration patterns for interactions
with tabletops. Vatavu et al.(2016) leveraged vibrations delivered through a custom
finger-augmentation device to create the illusion of holding digital content after pick-
ing it up from the smartphone’s touchscreen, and examined aspects of user perception
regarding the concept of digital content as invisible, yet tangible matter. Depending
on the chosen technology, the perceived effectiveness of haptic feedback varies ac-
cording to specific body locations. For example, an evaluation of ultrasound haptics
for above-device interaction (Freeman et al., 2014) revealed that haptic feedback on
the finger was more suitable than when delivered on the wrist. However, results from
Stanke et al.(2020) on the differences between electrotactile and vibrotactile stimula-
tion revealed user preferences for electrotactile feedback on the wrist rather than the
finger. Lastly, Terenti et al.(2024b) examined wearable devices for augmenting touch
interactions with virtual displays, and reported insights about users’ preferences for
vibrotactile feedback on the index finger compared to other locations on the arm or
vibrations delivered through the VR controller, respectively. Vibrotactile feedback to
augment the sensation of immersion in virtual environments through realistic touch
interaction with virtual objects has received a lot of attention; see (Mart´ ınez et al.,
2014; Moon et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) for a few examples.
While these technical solutions represent creative ways to leverage wearable devices,
of various form factors and at various locations on the body, for providing vibrotactile
feedback during touch input, they are challenging to reuse without a formalization of
how native, on-screen and external, wearable-delivered vibrations can be combined.
Our Wear+Touch taxonomy of cross-device vibrotactile feedback techniques, intro-
duced in Section 3, provides such a formalization, while the demonstrative applications
presented in Section 4 illustrate with technical engineering details how this formaliza-
tion can be put into practice for various commodity devices. Finally, empirical results
from our two experiments, reported in Sections 5 and 6, reveal user experience benefits
of vibrotactile feedback delivered by wearable devices at various locations on the arm
used for touch input.
3. W ear+T ouch
Based on our analysis of the scientific literature and possible combinations of haptics
being natively supported or not available in touchscreen devices, we identify four
distinct situations where vibrotactile feedback delivered by wearables near the location
of the touch point, i.e., the index finger, wrist, and forearm, can accompany touchscreen
input; see Figure 2 for an illustration.
(1) Addition. Consider a touchscreen device that does not have a native component
for vibrotactile feedback, i.e., the case of public interactive ambient displays. The
role of the wearable in this case is to add vibrotactile feedback during touchscreen
input in order to compensate for the missing modality in the touchscreen device;
see Figure 1, left. For example, vibrotactile feedback can be delivered by an
5
1 the wearable reinforces,
with the same pattern,
the vibrotactile
feedback delivered by
the touchscreen display
2
4
addition reinforcement
expansion
Wear+Touch Haptics 
the wearable
delivers vibrotactile
feedback during
user input with the
touchscreen display
the wearable expands,
over a large part of the
user's body the
informational content
of the vibrations from
the touchscreen display
touchscreen display
wearables
single/same vibrotactile pattern
3 extension
the wearable extends
to the user's body the
same informational
content of the
vibrations from the
touchscreen display
multiple/complementary vibrotactile patterns
Figure 2. A taxonomy of Wear+Touch vibrotactile feedback techniques—addition, reinforcement, extension,
and expansion —delivered in conjunction on the screen and arm by touchscreens and wearables alike.
electronic ring worn on the finger touching the display (Le et al., 2016). Even
though the touchscreen device cannot provide vibrotactile feedback natively, the
ring is located reasonably close to the point where the finger makes contact with
the touchscreen to compensate for the missing on-screen vibrations.
(2) Reinforcement. In this case, the touchscreen device has a native module for
vibrotactile feedback as most smartphones and tablets have. The role of the
wearable is thus to reinforce vibrotactile feedback during touchscreen input with
additional vibrations provided on the user’s finger, wrist, or forearm in contexts
of use where such reinforcement is needed, such as eyes-free touch input (Wang
et al., 2013; Jamalzadeh et al., 2023). For example, Figure 1, right shows touch-
screen input with an in-vehicle infotainment system. Since this interaction con-
text is mostly eyes-free, the on-screen vibrations are duplicated on the user’s
wrist by the smartwatch to reinforce confirmation that soft button presses and
stroke gesture have been correctly recognized by the in-vehicle system and, thus,
prevent the driver from taking their eyes off the road.
(3) Extension. This technique combines touchscreens that integrate native vibro-
tactile feedback with vibrations provided by a wearable device, where the latter
presents complementary information to the user instead of a mere reinforcement
as in the previous technique. For example, Figure 1, middle shows a user typing a
message in a chat application. As they type, vibrotactile feedback on the smart-
phone accompanies each keystroke. However, when the interlocutor is typing at
the same time, vibrations on the smartwatch notify the user accordingly with a
different vibrotactile pattern than that provided through the smartphone.
(4) Expansion. In this case, the touchscreen integrates native vibrotactile feedback,
while vibrations provided by multiple wearables expand, while providing com-
plementary information, to a larger part of the user’s body towards a stronger,
more immersive augmentation of touchscreen interaction. For example, a smart
ring and smartwatch are employed in conjunction to deliver a sensation of vi-
brations expanding from the contact point on the touchscreen, where the finger
has landed, through the finger and to the wrist. Figure 4, bottom shows a user
wearing a custom wearable device, which we designed to deliver simultaneous vi-
brations on the index finger, wrist, and forearm. Frequent events occurring in the
game played on the smartphone, e.g., the snake making a turn, are accompanied
6
by on-screen vibrations. However, specific events, which require users’ increased
attention to the game, such as the snake eating a harmful mushroom or the
damage made by a bomb exploding, are accompanied by vibrations expanding
from the screen to the finger, wrist, and forearm, in sequence.
The Wear+Touch taxonomy introduces specialized roles for arm-localized wearable
devices to augment touchscreen input with vibrotactile feedback delivered near the lo-
cation of the finger making contact with the touchscreen. In this framework, vibrations
on the finger, wrist, and forearm can be designed to simulate, replicate, supplement,
or complement on-screen vibrotactile feedback. Such augmented touchscreen interac-
tions can be readily implemented with off-the-shelf wearable devices, as we show in
Section 4, making Wear+Touch technically feasible for practitioners. At the same time,
Wear+Touch provides the necessary conceptual formalization of combined touchscreen
and wearable models of vibrotactile feedback delivery, useful for practitioners to take
advantage of an additional feedback layer for a variety of applications involving touch-
screens. In this context, we complement Wear+Touch with a set of design requirements
(DR1 to DR3) for compatible wearable devices and applications that can be employed
to deliver combined on-screen and on-body vibrotactile feedback.
DR1: Easy integration of compatible wearables. Wearable devices come in many
flavors, e.g., smartwatches, fitness trackers, smartglasses, smart rings, smart ear-
buds, and smart jewelry, with different functionalities, applications, and sup-
porting platforms. Nevertheless, the large majority of these devices have built-in
Bluetooth communications to share data with companion smartphone applica-
tions, which extend their functionality in terms of configuration, data logging and
analysis, integration with cloud services, and so forth. From this perspective, we
define a “compatible Wear+Touch wearable” to denote any device that (i) has
built-in Bluetooth communications and (ii) is programmable. Although we prefer
Bluetooth communications for low energy consumption, other communications
technology, such as Wi-Fi, could be equally employed for pairing a wearable to
a touchscreen display and sending and receiving commands for vibrotactile feed-
back. This design requirement specifies that Wear+Touch techniques could be
implemented with any wearable fulfilling these two characteristics.
DR2: Easy integration of compatible software components. Practical imple-
mentations of Wear+Touch techniques can also benefit from software compo-
nents, device abstractions, services, and data flows, reflective of modern software
engineering, for integration in touchscreen applications that are augmented with
vibrotactile feedback delivered by wearables. To this end, we define a “compati-
ble Wear+Touch component” as any software component that enables access to
end-users’ wearables. SDKs and APIs, such as those delivered by manufactur-
ers of wearable devices, but also other middleware software, including general-
purpose software architecture for interactive devices and environments (Schipor
and Vatavu, 2023) qualify for this category.
DR3: Easy customization of vibrotactile feedback. Developers of Wear+Touch
applications should be able to easily specify vibrotactile feedback for compatible
wearables and through compatible components, from simple on/off vibrations
that provide confirmatory feedback to on-screen touches to more complex and
meaningful vibrotactile patterns; see Terenti and Vatavu(2023) for an overview of
vibrotactile feedback authoring tools. Also, end users should be able to configure
which of their wearables are used to deliver vibrotactile feedback during touch-
7
screen interactions. A middleware on the user’s smartphone, which implements
private and secure communications with the user’s wearables and leverages the
Wear+Touch API, is one practical solution to implement this requirement.
The Wear+Touch set of techniques enables multiple possibilities for designing and
integrating touchscreen devices and wearables towards enhancing the user experience
of touchscreen input in various applications and contexts of use. From addition to
expansion, the complexity of the combined native, on-screen and external, wearable-
based vibrotactile feedback increases in Wear+Touch in terms of locale (i.e., where
vibrations are delivered with respect to the location of the touch point on the screen)
and extent (i.e., the coverage of the user’s body receiving vibrotactile feedback and the
number of wearables delivering feedback, respectively). The four techniques constitut-
ing the Wear+Touch space can theoretically be implemented for any combination of
touchscreen and wearables as long as communication is possible and the devices are
programmable; see our design requirements. To demonstrate the technical feasibility
of Wear+Touch, we showcase in Section 4 practical implementations involving off-the-
shelf touchscreen devices and wearables, and report practical benefits in terms of the
perceived experience reported by end users of Wear+Touch interactions in Sections 5
and 6, respectively.
4. Demonstrative Applications of W ear+T ouch
To demonstrate the technical feasibility of Wear+Touch, we implemented several prac-
tical applications; see Figures 1 and 4 for photographs and screenshots. For the ad-
dition, reinforcement, and extension techniques, we employed off-the-shelf wearables.
To demonstrate extension, which requires vibrations delivery at various locations on
the arm, we designed a custom wearable device that delivers vibrations on the user’s
index finger, wrist, and forearm, i.e., for an expansion effect, vibrations start on the
finger, move to the wrist, and end on the forearm. According to design requirement
DR1, we employed wearables featuring Bluetooth communications. Following DR2, we
leveraged web-based technology with open standards and protocols, and chose gaming,
text input, and eyes-free interaction as our demonstrative applications. Furthermore,
we employed the VIREO web-based tool (Terenti and Vatavu, 2023) to author vi-
brotactile feedback patterns for our wearable devices with metaphorical connotations
informed by the VibViz library (Seifi et al., 2015), in relation to requirement DR 3.
4.1. Addition: Adding Vibrotactile Feedback to a Large Display
We implemented addition with a video game called “Catch the bees, don’t get stung,”
which we deployed to a 46-inch Ideum Platform multitouch surface (1920×1080 pixels,
3GHz i7-4790S CPU, running Windows); see Figure 1, left and Figure 4, top left. We
used JavaScript for the development and ran the game in the Google Chrome web
browser. The game shows a hive composed of hexagonal honeycomb cells, inhabited
by bees of different colors. When a bee is touched, it is “caught,” and not shown any
longer on the screen. The goal of the game is to catch all the bees of a given color as
fast as possible within a time limit, while not touching the bees of other colors because
they “sting” and, consequently, the player would loose points. The game can be played
in single-user mode or by several users at once (the touchscreen display detects up to
60 simultaneous touches), where each user is assigned a different bee color. Since the
8
The user interacts with a
touchscreen device without
built-in haptics capabilities.
The touchscreen sends a request
for vibrotactile feedback to be
delivered through the user's
wearable.
The vibrotactile feedback is
rendered on one of the
connected wearable devices (e.g.,
smart ring) to enhance touch
input.
The user interacts with a
touchscreen device with built-
in haptics capabilities.
The touchscreen delivers
vibrotactile feedback and sends a
request for the same vibration
pattern to be delivered through
the user's wearable as well.
The pattern rendered on the
touchscreen is reproduced on
the user’s wearable to further
enhance the touch input
experience.
The user employs the
smartphone application
to configure available
wearable devices for
vibrotactile feedback.
The user connects on the
touchscreen application by
scanning a QR code and
agreeing to receive vibrotactile
feedback through their own
wearable devices.
2
reinforcement
1
addition
The user interacts with a
touchscreen device with built-in
haptics capabilities.
A complex vibrotactile pattern is
distributed across several
wearable devices.
Each wearable device renders a part of the complex vibrotactile
pattern.
The user interacts with a
touchscreen device with built-in
haptics capabilities.
The touchscreen delivers
vibrotactile feedback and sends a
request for a different vibration
pattern to be delivered through
the user's wearable for additional
feedback.
The wearable device renders a
different vibrotactile pattern to
further enhance the touch input
experience and provide
additional feedback.
3
extension
4
expansion
Figure 3. User workflows of the Wear+Touch interaction techniques involving complementary vibrotactile
feedback delivered through a wearable device during touchscreen input. From top to bottom: pairing between
the touchscreen device and the middleware mobile application on the smartphone, implementation of addition
for touchscreens lacking haptics capabilities, implementation of reinforcement with the wearable delivering the
same vibrotactile pattern as the touchscreen device, implementation of extension with the wearable delivering
a different vibrotactile pattern, and implementation of expansion, where the vibrotactile feedback starts from
the screen and propagates on the arm through the finger, wrist, and forearm.
9
Ideum Platform touchscreen does not have native support for vibrotactile feedback,
we used Ring Zero, 1 an electronic ring that recognizes mid-air gestures and delivers
vibrotactile feedback in the form of simple on/off vibrations of fixed intensity.
We developed an Android mobile application to mediate communications between
the game running on the large touchscreen display and the smart ring. First, the
user specifies the wearable device within the mobile application and allows receiving
vibrotactile feedback that is triggered externally; see the workflow depicted in Figure 3,
top. Next, the user scans a QR code available within the touchscreen application
to link the wearable and the touchscreen. Vibration commands are sent from the
game on the touchscreen display to the smartphone application via the WebSocket 2
protocol, and a Bluetooth connection is used to implement communications between
the smartphone and the Ring Zero device. For the design of vibrotactile feedback, we
used VibViz (Seifi et al., 2015) to identify patterns associated with the words “buzz,”
“success,” and “error,” which we then specified using the VIREO (Terenti and Vatavu,
2023) graphical authoring tool and exported as a JavaScript file, encoding vibrations
using Vibration API, 3 to include in our JavaScript application for the touchscreen
display. When bees of the correct color are touched, a “bee buzz” vibration is rendered
on the finger; see Figure 4a for a visual illustration of the vibrotactile pattern and
its description using the mathematical formalism of the VIREO authoring tool for
vibrotactile feedback (Terenti and Vatavu, 2023). When bees of the wrong color are
touched, a “bee sting” vibration is delivered instead; see Figure 4b. When the user
completes the level (all of the bees of the correct color were caught), a new hive
configuration is presented and three more seconds are added to the user’s time limit
as a bonus, accompanied by a cheerful vibration representing a linearly increasing
intensity on the finger; see Figure 4c. Finally, the “game over” event, when the user
has lost the game, is notified with a corresponding vibration pattern; see Figure 4d.
4.2. Reinforcement: Reinforcing On-Screen Vibrotactile Feedback During
Eyes-Free Touch Input
We implemented reinforcement for a music player application, 4 which we deployed to
a tablet (10-inch Samsung Galaxy Tab 4, 1.2GHz Quad-Core CPU, 1280 ×800 pixels,
detects 10 simultaneous touches) mounted on the front panel of a car; see Figure 1,
right and Figure 4, top middle for screenshots. The user workflow corresponding to re-
inforcement is illustrated in Figure 3: following touch input, a command is sent from
the touchscreen application to the wearable device to deliver vibrotactile feedback
according to the specific touch point on the screen and the application logic. Char-
acteristic to the reinforcement technique, on-screen vibrations are doubled with the
same vibrotactile pattern delivered through the wearable with the purpose of providing
confirmatory feedback of the on-screen touches. To implement communications with
the smartwatch, we used the same Android application described in Subsection 4.1, to
which we added a new module implementing Bluetooth communications between the
smartphone and the smartwatch. Although we did not observe noticeable delays in
the communications, please see Section 7 for a discussion and future work opportuni-
ties on synchronizing on-screen and wearable-delivered vibrations for applications with
constraints about such aspects. We implemented several stroke-gesture commands to
1https://us.amazon.com/Ring-R001-PB02-ZERO-M-Black/dp/B00U8IX7FO
2https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6455
3https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Vibration_API
4Adapted from https://github.com/Davigl/vue-music-player.
10
(a) bee buzz (b) bee sting
(c) level completed (d) game over
(e) action successful (f) volume adjusting
(g) action error (h) gesture error
(i) new message
(j) interlocutor typing
 (k) snake changes direction
 (m) snake eats a bad fruit  (n) game over
 (l) snake eats a good fruit
addition
 reinforcement extension
expansion
A(t)=[100 |
0,075
0
 , 100e
-20t
|
0,2
0,075
] A(t)=[e
26t
+1|
0,15
0
 , 50 |
0,35
0,15
 , 50e
5t
|
0,5
0,35
]
A(t)= 185t+25  |
0,4
0
A(t)= 90  |
0,5
0
A(t)=[90 |
0,1
0
 , 90 |
0,3
0,15
]
A(t)=[e
50t
|
0,1
0
 , e
50t
|
0,2
0,1
] A(t)= 100  |
0,72
0
A(t)=[90 |
0,1
0
 , 90 |
0,225
0,125
 , 90 |
0,4
0,25
]
A(t)=[10e
9t
|
0,3
0
 , 150e
-10t
+2|
0,6
0,3
]
A(t)=[100 |
0,1
0
 , 100 |
0,25
0,15
 , 100 |
0,4
0,3
 ,
100 |
0,7
0,6
 , 100 |
0,85
0,75
 , 100 |
1,0
0,9
]
A(t)=[30e
-35t
+50|
0,25
0
 , -400t+100  |
0,5
0,25
]
A(t)=[e
37t
|
0,1
0
 , 40e
-40t
|
0,2
0,1
 ,
e
31t
|
0,45
0,3
 , 100e
-30t
|
0,6
0,45
]
A(t)= 60e
-9t
sin(30πt)+40 |
0,6
0
A(t)=[1000t  |
0,1
0
 , 1000t  |
0,2
0,1
 , 1000t  |
0,3
0,2
 ,
1000t  |
0,4
0,3
 , -1000t+100  |
0,5
0,4
]
Figure 4. Demonstrative applications for the Wear+Touch vibrotactile feedback techniques: (1) addition
for a large touchscreen display, (2) reinforcement during eyes-free input inside the vehicle, (3) extension for
smartphone text entry, and (4) expansion with a custom-made wearable device for the finger, wrist, and
forearm. Note: visual representations of the vibration patterns were generated with the VIREO tool (Terenti
and Vatavu, 2023) and their mathematical description, A(t), follows the VIREO formalism as well.
navigate through the music file collection: swipe left and right to go to the next and
previous music track, swipe up and down to increase and decrease the audio volume,
and drawing a circle to switch between play and pause mode. These gesture types can
be readily recognized with simple geometric approaches, while the gesture set can be
easily extended with more complex gestures and more powerful stroke-gesture recog-
nizers (Vatavu et al., 2012a; Magrofuoco et al., 2021), including algorithmic techniques
specifically designed for low-resource platforms and devices (Vatavu et al., 2018). Fol-
lowing each gesture command, vibrotactile feedback was delivered on the tablet, but
also on the user’s wrist through a smartwatch (Galaxy Watch 3, 1.15GHz Dual-Core
CPU), as a confirmation of gesture input being detected and correctly recognized.
Just like before, we used JavaScript to implement the application and VIREO (Ter-
enti and Vatavu, 2023) and VibViz (Seifi et al., 2015) to design and specify vibration
11
patterns for specific events: two short, exponentially increasing pulses (Figure 4e) for
successfully completed actions, two vibrations of constant intensity, but different du-
ration (Figure 4f) for errors, and so forth; see the corresponding user workflow in
Figure 3 and the description of these vibrotactile feedback patterns in Figure 4 using
the mathematical formalism of the VIREO authoring tool (Terenti and Vatavu, 2023).
The specific vibration patterns are less important to our goal where we are interested
in the technical feasibility of reinforcement using commodity digital devices. What is
important is that the same vibration pattern is presented both on the screen and the
user’s wrist during the reinforcement technique.
4.3. Extension: Extending On-Screen Vibrotactile Feedback to the Wrist
For our next demonstration, we augmented a chat application on the smartphone
with vibrotactile feedback provided by a smartwatch (Galaxy Watch 3); see Figure 1,
middle and Figure 4, top right for screenshots. Keystrokes on the smartphone keyboard
are usually accompanied by gentle vibrations. To implement extension through the
smartwatch, we considered additional information that could be delivered to the user
while typing. To this end, we implemented two vibrotactile patterns: an exponentially
increasing vibration, followed by an exponentially decreasing one, delivered by the
smartwatch when the user receives a new text message while typing (Figure 4i) and,
when the interlocutor is also typing at the same time, a different vibration pattern,
mimicking the visual animation of the conventional three dots pulsing (Figure 4j) is
delivered through the smartwatch. The user workflow corresponding to extension is
illustrated in Figure 3: following touch input, a command is sent from the smartphone
to the smartwatch device to deliver vibrotactile feedback according to the specific
case of the interlocutor typing as well. Characteristic to the extension technique, on-
screen vibrations are complemented with a different vibrotactile pattern delivered
through the wearable with the purpose of providing more feedback to the user than
available on the primary device. In this context, the vibrotactile feedback from the
smartwatch extends the informational content provided to the user while typing a
text message in the smartphone application. As in our previous demonstrations, we
used HTML/CSS, JavaScript, and WebSocket for application development and the
VIREO (Terenti and Vatavu, 2023) and VibViz (Seifi et al., 2015) tools for the design
of vibrotactile patterns for the two devices.
4.4. Expansion: Expanding Vibrotactile Feedback from the Screen to the
Finger, Wrist, and Forearm
To demonstrate expansion, we designed a custom wearable device to deliver vibrotac-
tile feedback at various locations across the arm. The device integrated three 10mm
DC coin vibration motors5 into a velcro band with adjustable length so that the motors
could be affixed comfortably to the index finger, wrist, and forearm, as shown in Fig-
ure 4, bottom left. The vibration motors were commanded by a CH340G NodeMcu V3
board based on the ESP8266 Wi-Fi module, 6 a self contained System-on-a-Chip with
integrated TCP/IP protocol stack, which we programmed to communicate with the
smartphone application via the WebSocket7 protocol. We used the wearable device to
5https://nfpshop.com/product/10mm-coin-vibration-motor-3mm-type-model-nfp-c1030
6https://esp8266-shop.com/product/nodemcu-esp8266-esp-12e
7https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API
12
augment the user experience of a classical snake game running on a smartphone with
arm-localized vibrotactile feedback delivered according to specific game events. The
goal of the game was to guide a continuously moving snake to collect as many points
as possible by eating good fruits and avoiding bad ones. Each time the snake changes
direction following touch input, a corresponding vibration (Figure 4k) is delivered on
the smartphone. When a good fruit is eaten, a vibration pattern with a happy con-
notation, informed using the VibViz library (Seifi et al., 2015), is played on the user’s
finger (Figure 4l). When a bad fruit is eaten, a vibration with a negative connotation
is delivered both on the screen and finger. Game over is notified with a strong vibra-
tion that starts on the smartphone and continues on the finger, wrist, and forearm
(Figure 4n); see the corresponding user workflow in Figure 3 and Figure 4 for the de-
scription of these vibrotactile feedback patterns using the mathematical formalism of
the VIREO authoring tool (Terenti and Vatavu, 2023). The user workflow correspond-
ing to expansion can be summarized as follows: following touch input, a command is
sent from the smartphone to the wearable device to deliver vibrotactile feedback that
is being felt as propagating through the arm, from the finger to the wrist and the
forearm, respectively. Characteristic to the expansion technique, on-screen vibrations
are complemented with a vibrotactile pattern that is delivered through the wearable
(or multiple wearables, depending on the implementation) on a large part of the body
in order to expand the original capabilities of the primary device and generate a new
sensation, of larger extent in terms of body coverage, than possible with all of the
other Wear+Touch techniques. Just like for the extension technique, demonstrated
in the previous subsection, expansion provides complementary vibrotactile feedback
to that offered by the touchscreen. However, unlike extension, the use of expansion
enables a larger part of the user’s body to receive vibrotactile feedback and, thus, has
larger coverage and features more complex vibrotactile patterns, e.g., vibrations start
from the screen, traverse the finger and wrist, and end on the forearm, in this order.
In our implementation, we solved the technical aspect of synchronizing the vibrations
delivered at different locations on the arm by our specific design involving a single
wearable device with three actuators, but other implementations involving distinct
wearables may need a different technical approach; see Section 7 for a discussion of
future work in this direction, including the need for dedicated software architecture.
4.5. Summary
Our main goal in this section was to show how the Wear+Touch interaction techniques
can be readily implemented for commodity wearables and touchscreen displays using
manufacturer APIs/SDKs and conventional software technology, standards, and pro-
tocols for the web to implement communications across the various involved devices.
In the next two sections, we address the user experience of vibrotactile feedback deliv-
ered away from the touch point on the user’s arm, as follows. In Section 5 we examine
the user experience of the addition technique, where vibrotactile feedback is added to
touchscreen displays without native, built-in haptics capabilities. In this experiment,
we are interested in locations on the user’s arm that deliver the highest user expe-
rience. In Section 6, we examine the user experience of all of the four Wear+Touch
techniques—addition, reinforcement, extension, and expansion,—which we compare
to the control condition represented by conventional on-screen vibrations.
13
Figure 5. Photographs of participants in our first experiment interacting with an application on a large
touchscreen display without built-in haptics. According to the addition Wear+Touch technique, vibrotactile
feedback accompanying touchscreen input is delivered exclusively via a wearable device (visible in these pho-
tographs on the participants’ finger, wrist, and forearm).
5. Experiment #1: The User Experience of Substituting On-Screen
Vibrations with Vibrotactile F eedback Delivered Through a W earable
Different locations on the user’s arm where vibrotactile feedback may be delivered
through a wearable device, e.g., the index finger vs. the wrist vs. the forearm, are likely
to determine different user experiences of touchscreen input, especially when vibrations
come exclusively through the wearable, which is the case of theaddition technique and
large touchscreen displays without native haptics capabilities. To gain insight into the
characteristics of the user experience of this Wear+Touch interaction technique, where
vibrotactile feedback is delivered on the arm but not on the touchscreen, we conducted
a first controlled experiment involving solely the addition technique and our custom-
made wearable device for the index finger, wrist, and forearm. The experiment was
approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Suceava, ref. no. 50/21.01.2022.
5.1. Experiment design
5.1.1. Participants
Twenty participants, representing young adults aged between 19 and 34 years old
(mean M=26.4 and standard deviation SD=3.6 years), were recruited for our experi-
ment via an internal emailing list and convenience sampling. Fifteen of the participants
self-identified as male, and five as female. Two participants reported being left-handed.
Furthermore, all of the participants were smartphone users, six (30.0%) were also us-
ing tablets on a regular basis, twelve (60.0%) reported using smartwatches or fitness
trackers, and five participants (25.0%) reported using smart earbuds. A number of
eleven participants, representing 55.0% in our sample, had the keyboard vibration
feature turned on on their smartphones.
14
5.1.2. Design
We employed a within-subjects design with one independent variable,Location, with
four conditions: finger, wrist, and forearm, specifying locations on the arm where
vibrotactile feedback was provided, and none, representing the control condition of
no vibrotactile feedback. The dependent variables are represented by eight specific
UX measures designed to capture the multiple facets of the experience of vibrotactile
feedback delivered away from the touch point on the index finger, wrist, and forearm.
These measures employ, in equal number, both positively and negatively connoted
descriptors of the perceived experience with respect to the implicit baseline condition
of no vibrations, such as depicted in the following statement “Interacting with the
display felt more enjoyable with vibrotactile feedback than without”; see the first
column of Table 1 for our set of UX measures representing an extension of the five UX
measures employed by (Koskinen et al., 2008, p. 302) to evaluate vibrotactile feedback
delivered through a mobile device. We evaluated each measure using 5-point Likert
scales with ratings ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 2 (“disagree”), 3 (“neither
agree nor disagree”), 4 (“agree”), and 5 (“strongly agree”), respectively, representing
our participants’ level of agreement with the corresponding statements.
5.1.3. Apparatus
Based on the practical experience that we gained by designing and implementing the
Wear+Touch techniques into various applications (see Section 4 for our demonstra-
tions), we used HTML/CSS and JavaScript Leaflet 8 to develop a new Wear+Touch
application for our experiment represented by an interactive map intended to be used
on large touchscreen displays. At startup, the application zooms into one of several
maps of cities from around the world, and shows pinpoints for specific targets in that
city, e.g., the Museum of Contemporary Art of Barcelona; see Figure 5 for photographs
captured in our experiment. When the user touches any of the targets, a popup window
is displayed with a brief description, while vibrotactile feedback is delivered at various
locations on the user’s arm through our custom wearable device (technical details are
available in Subsection 4.4). Vibrations are delivered by each motor independently, ac-
cording to the conditions of the experiment design (see the next subsection) for a fixed
duration of 150 ms, a value that we determined empirically so that vibrations could
be felt unambiguously on the index finger, wrist, and forearm, given their different
tactile sensibilities. We ran the map application in the Google Chrome web browser
of a large 46-inch Ideum Platform 9 touchscreen display (1920 ×1080 pixel resolution,
12 ms touch response time, integrated CPU Intel Core i7-4790S 3.2 GHz, 16GB RAM).
5.1.4. Task
The participants were presented the touchscreen display and our custom wearable de-
vice and were briefed about the specifics of the task. For each condition of Location,
a different city map was presented and, after completing the corresponding trials, the
participants were asked a question involving all of the targets from the map, e.g.,
“What is the year of the oldest building?” To answer the question, the participants
had to touch all of the targets in order to reveal their descriptions. The participants
were allowed to touch each target multiple times. The order of the finger, wrist, and
8https://leafletjs.com
9https://www.ideum.com/products/touch-tables
15
Perceived Enjoyment1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Efficiency
1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Confidence1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Integration1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Distractedness1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Difficulty
1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Confusion1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Perceived Complexity1
2
3
4
5
Finger Wrist Forearm
Figure 6. User experience ratings (bars show median values) of vibrotactile feedback delivered on the finger,
wrist, and forearm during touch input on a large display. Notes: higher values denote a better user experience
according to the positively-connoted UX descriptors (shown in the top row, 5 represents the highest rating),
while lower values indicate a better user experience for the negatively-connoted descriptors (bottom row, 1
represents the lowest rating); see also Table 1 for statistical significance tests for each of these measures.
forearm conditions of the Location independent variable was randomized per partici-
pant. The first condition was always touch input without vibrotactile feedback (none),
representing our baseline. The participants were allowed to spend as much time as de-
sired with each city map until they felt confident they could answer the upcoming
question. On average, tasks were completed in 12.2 minutes (SD=4.3) with partici-
pants performing on average 189.1 touches (SD=44.5). At the end of the experiment,
the participants filled out a questionnaire containing our set of eight UX measures.
5.1.5. Statistical Analysis
Due to the ordinal nature of our dependent variables, representing Likert-scale rat-
ings, we report medians (Mdn) as the preferred measure of central tendency, and
use ANOVA with the F statistic and the Aligned-Rank Transform for nonparamet-
ric factorial analysis, implemented with the ARTool (Wobbrock et al., 2011) 10 and
ART-C (Elkin et al., 2021) software tools. Furthermore, we use Bonferroni corrections
for our post-hoc tests according to the number of pairwise comparisons (three in this
experiment, representing all of the direct comparisons among the finger, wrist, and
forearm conditions, corresponding to a significance level of p=.05 after correction).
5.2. Results
Figure 6 shows the median ratings of the perceived user experience of vibrotactile feed-
back delivered on the finger, wrist, and forearm, according to the different dimensions
evaluated in our experiment, while Table 1 highlights statistically significant effects of
the Location independent variable on our set of eight UX measures.
10https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ARTool/index.html
16
Table 1. Statistical significance tests for the eight UX measures used in our first experiment; see Figure 6 for
the corresponding median ratings. Note: statistically significant effects are highlighted.
UX measure
Effect of Location
main effect finger vs.
wrist †
finger vs.
forearm†
wrist vs.
forearm†
■ Perceived-Enjoyment Interacting
with the display felt more enjoyable with
vibrotactile feedback than without.
F(2,95)=13.927,
p<.001, η2
p=.23
t(95)=3.425,
p<.005
t(95)=5.190,
p<.001
t(95)=1.765,
p=.242, n.s.
■ Perceived-Efficiency Interacting
with the display felt more efficient with
vibrotactile feedback than without.
F(2,95)=24.654,
p<.001, η2
p=.34
t(95)=4.823,
p<.001
t(95)=6.831,
p<.001
t(95)=2.009,
p=.142, n.s.
■ Perceived-Confidence Vibrotactile
feedback made me feel more confident
when interacting with the display
compared to when vibrations were absent.
F(2,95)=14.970,
p<.001, η2
p=.24
t(95)=3.586,
p<.005
t(95)=5.372,
p<.001
t(95)=1.786,
p=.232, n.s.
■ Perceived-Integration Touching the
display and feeling the vibrations
integrated well into one experience.
F(2,95)=16.857,
p<.001, η2
p=.26
t(95)=4.198,
p<.001
t(95)=5.573,
p<.001
t(95)=1.375,
p=.517, n.s.
■ Perceived-Distracteness Interacting
with the display felt more distracting with
vibrotactile feedback than without.
F(2,95)=7.813,
p<.001, η2
p=.14
t(95)=2.053,
p=.128, n.s.
t(95)=3.952,
p<.001
t(95)=1.899,
p=.182, n.s.
■ Perceived-Difficulty Interacting
with the display felt more difficult with
vibrotactile feedback than without.
F(2,95)=3.375,
p=.038, η2
p=.07
t(95)=1.995,
p=.147, n.s.
t(95)=2.439,
p=.049
t(95)=0.444,
p=1.00, n.s.
■ Perceived-Confusion Vibrotactile
feedback created confusion for me when
interacting with the display.
F(2,95)=6.716,
p=.002, η2
p=.12
t(95)=3.017,
p<.001
t(95)=3.311,
p=.004
t(95)=0.294,
p=1.00, n.s.
■ Perceived-Complexity Vibrotactile
feedback was unnecessarily complex when
interacting with the display.
F(2,95)=1.645,
p=.198, n.s.
t(95)=1.807,
p=.222, n.s.
t(95)=0.760,
p=1.00, n.s.
t(95)=1.046,
p=.894, n.s.
† Bonferroni corrections applied for three contrasts involving all of the Location conditions.
We found that Location had a statistically significant effect on all of the UX
measures with effect sizes ranging from medium (η2
p=.07 for Perceived-Difficulty)
to large ( η2
p=.34 for Perceived-Efficiency), except for Perceived-Complexity
(p=.198, n.s.); see Table 1. Post-hoc contrast tests revealed statistically significant
differences between vibrations delivered on the finger compared to vibrations on the
wrist and forearm, but not between wrist and forearm; see the last three columns of
Table 1. In terms of the positively-connoted descriptors of UX (first four rows of Table 1
and the top row in Figure 6), vibrotactile feedback on the finger felt more enjoyable
(Mdn=5), efficient (Mdn=5), and confident (Mdn=5) as well as better integrated
(Mdn=5) compared to thewrist (Mdn=4 across all of these four measures) andforearm
(Mdn=4, 3, 4, and 4, respectively)—all statistically significant differences at p<.005
or p<.001. Also, the negatively-connoted descriptors revealed vibrations on the finger
as exhibiting lower perceived distraction (Mdn=1), difficulty (Mdn=1), and confusion
(Mdn=1) compared to the wrist (Mdn=2, 2, and 1) and forearm (Mdn=3, 2, and
2). These findings show a better user experience, corroborated by both positively
and negatively-connoted descriptors, as vibrotactile feedback is delivered closer to the
touch point on the screen, i.e., on the index finger, wrist, and forearm, in this order.
17
Nevertheless, the median ratings are favorable across all of the UX measures employed
in our experiment. These empirical results complement the technical feasibility of
the addition Wear+Touch technique, which we discussed in Section 4, with practical
benefits represented by a better user experience expected for end users.
6. Experiment #2: The User Experience of On-Screen Vibrations and
Vibrotactile F eedback Delivered Through a W earable
Our first experiment revealed that vibrotactile feedback delivered through a wear-
able improves the user experience of touch input for large touchscreen displays that
do not have built-in haptics capabilities. Moreover, it showed that the finger, being
closest to the touch point on the screen, is the preferred location on the arm where
to deliver vibrotactile feedback for the implementation of the addition technique. To
understand the relative benefits of the other Wear+Touch interaction techniques on
the user experience of touchscreen input— addition vs. reinforcement, extension, and
expansion,—we designed a second experiment.
6.1. Experiment design
6.1.1. Participants
We recruited twenty participants representing young adults aged between 19 and 44
years old (M=22.6, SD=6.1 years) using a similar procedure as in the first experiment
based on an internal emailing list and convenience sampling. The age and gender struc-
ture of the sample was similar to that from the first experiment, as follows. Fourteen
of the participants self-identified as male and six as female, and all of the participants
reported being right-handed. In terms of their prior experience with computer and
digital devices, all of the participants reported regular use of smartphones and PCs,
eight (40%) were using smartwatches or fitness trackers, and six (30%) reported using
tablets. A number of sixteen participants, representing 80% in our sample, reported
having the keyboard vibration feature turned on on their smartphones. None of the
participants took part in the first experiment presented in Section 5.
6.1.2. Design
Similarly to the first experiment, we followed a within-subjects design with one inde-
pendent variable, Technique, with five conditions: vibrotactile feedback on the finger
(addition), on the touchscreen and the finger with the same vibrotactile pattern (rein-
forcement), on the touchscreen and the finger but with different vibrotactile patterns
(extension), vibrotactile feedback that starts on the touchscreen and propagates to
the user’s forearm through the finger and wrist ( expansion), and the control condi-
tion of on-screen vibrations only. We employed the same eight UX measures as in our
first experiment to evaluate the various aspects of the user experience of vibrotactile
feedback delivered through the Wear+Touch techniques.
6.1.3. Apparatus
We employed the same custom-designed wearable device used in the previous exper-
iment to deliver vibrotactile feedback at various locations on the arm. To implement
18
  
Figure 7. Photographs from the second experiment with a close-up of the setup. To implement addition,
vibrotactile feedback was delivered solely through the wearable device. To implementreinforcement, extension,
and expansion, vibrotactile feedback was delivered conjointly on the touchscreen and through the wearable.
on-screen vibrations, we used a conventional smartphone (Samsung Galaxy A23, 6.6-
inch screen, and 1080x2408 pixel resolution), which we placed in a fixed position onto
a tabletop. We preferred this setup to that of users holding the smartphone to make
sure that on-screen vibrations were only felt on the interactive finger, and placed the
smartphone on a piece of Polyurethane material to reduce audio noise caused by the
contact with the table surface; see Figure 7 for photographs from our experiment. For
the application, we adapted the “Catch the bees, don’t get stung” game described
in Subsection 4.1 to run on the smartphone in the form of a Progressive Web Appli-
cation,11 and we slightly changed the gameplay to incorporate vibrotactile feedback
for all of the four Wear+Touch techniques according to specific events in the game,
as follows. We implemented bees of four different colors corresponding to different
behaviors when touched, according to each of the conditions of the Technique inde-
pendent variable. For instance, when a green colored bee is touched, it flies away from
the hive, outside the viewport, and the user receives a short vibration (150 ms) on the
finger only through the wearable device, corresponding to the addition technique. A
blue colored bee also flies away from the hive upon touch, but produces synchronous
vibrotactile feedback on the screen and on the finger (the same short pulse of 150
ms), according to the reinforcement technique. Touching both the green and blue bees
increases the game score. However, if the user touches two consecutive bees in a time
interval that is shorter than one second, neither of the bees fly away and no points are
gained. In this case, the user is altered with a short vibration on the touchscreen (100
ms) and two short vibrations on the finger (75 ms each, separated by a 50ms-long
pause), corresponding to the extension technique. Finally, when the user touches a
yellow colored bee, all of the visible bees fly around chaotically while the entire hive
shakes for a couple of seconds, during which the user receives the most expanded form
of vibrotactile feedback that starts on the screen and propagates to the finger, wrist,
and forearm, in this order, according to the expansion technique (150 ms pulses de-
livered in sequence). Touching the yellow bees reduces the game score by one point.
Finally, when the user touches a purple bee, the bee flies around without bringing any
11https://web.dev/explore/progressive-web-apps
19
Perceived Enjoyment1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Efficiency
1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Confidence1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Integration1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Distractedness1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Difficulty
1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Confusion1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Perceived Complexity1
2
3
4
5
Screen
Addit.
Reinf.
Exten.
Expan.
Figure 8. User experience ratings (bars show median values) of vibrotactile feedback delivered on the screen
and through the four Wear+Touch techniques of addition, reinforcement, extension, and expansion. Notes:
higher values denote a better experience according to the positively-connoted UX descriptors (shown in the
top row, where 5 represents the highest rating), while lower values indicate a better user experience for the
negatively-connoted descriptors (bottom row, where 1 represents the lowest rating); see also Table 2 for statis-
tical significance tests for each of these measures.
game point, and vibrotactile feedback (a pulse of 150 ms) is delivered through the
touchscreen, representing our control condition.
6.1.4. Task
After signing the consent form, the participants were presented with our custom wear-
able device, the video game, and the task represented by gaining as many points as
possible during a limited game time of three minutes initially. If half of the bees re-
mained in the hive upon expiration of game time, the hive was changed to a new
configuration of bees and eight more seconds are added to the game time. To maxi-
mize their score, the participants had to be fast and pay attention to the colors of the
bees flying in the hive. On average, tasks were completed in 7.3 minutes (SD=7s) per
participant, during which the participants performed on average 311 touches (SD=34).
At the end of the experiment, the participants filled out our questionnaire containing
the same set of eight UX measures as used in the first experiment.
6.1.5. Statistical Analysis
Since we measured the same dependent variables (ordinal, represented by Likert-scale
ratings), we used the same statistical analysis techniques as in the first experiment
based on ANOVA and the Aligned-Rank Transform (Wobbrock et al., 2011; Elkin
et al., 2021); see Subsection 5.1.5 for details.
20
Table 2. Statistical significance tests for the eight UX measures used in our second experiment; see Figure 8
for the corresponding median ratings. Note: statistically significant effects are highlighted.
UX measure
Effect of Technique
main effect addition vs.
on-screen†
reinforcement
vs. on-screen†
extension vs.
on-screen†
expansion vs.
on-screen†
■ Perceived-Enjoyment
Interacting with the display felt
more enjoyable with vibrotactile
feedback than without.
F(4,76)=4.039,
p=.005,
η2
p=.18
t(76)=0.887,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=2.599,
p=.045
t(76)=2.127,
p=.147, n.s.
t(76)=3.608,
p<.005
■ Perceived-Efficiency
Interacting with the display felt
more efficient with vibrotactile
feedback than without.
F(4,76)=4.096,
p<.005,
η2
p=.18
t(76)=2.067,
p=.169, n.s.
t(76)=2.984,
p=.015
t(76)=1.733,
p=.348, n.s.
t(76)=3.793,
p<.005
■ Perceived-Confidence
Vibrotactile feedback made me feel
more confident when interacting
with the display compared to when
vibrations were absent.
F(4,76)=2.377,
p=.060, n.s.
t(76)=1.582,
p=.471, n.s.
t(76)=2.544,
p=.052, n.s.
t(76)=1.605,
p=.451, n.s.
t(76)=2.762,
p=.029
■ Perceived-Integration
Touching the display and feeling
the vibrations integrated well into
one experience.
F(4,76)=2.185,
p=.079, n.s.
t(76)=1.671,
p=.396, n.s.
t(76)=2.176,
p=.131, n.s.
t(76)=0.368,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=2.253,
p=.109, n.s.
■ Perceived-Distracteness
Interacting with the display felt
more distracting with vibrotactile
feedback than without.
F(4,76)=2.153,
p=.082, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.325,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.776,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=0.521,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)= − 2.210,
p=.121, n.s.
■ Perceived-Difficulty
Interacting with the display felt
more difficult with vibrotactile
feedback than without.
F(4,76)=0.982,
p=.423, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.005,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=0.272,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=0.966,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.984,
p=1.000, n.s.
■ Perceived-Confusion
Vibrotactile feedback created
confusion for me when interacting
with the display.
F(4,76)=1.445,
p=.227, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.805,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.157,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=1.485,
p=.567, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.188,
p=1.000, n.s.
■ Perceived-Complexity
Vibrotactile feedback was
unnecessarily complex when
interacting with the display.
F(4,76)=0.311,
p=.870, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.544,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.095,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)=0.372,
p=1.000, n.s.
t(76)= − 0.562,
p=1.000, n.s.
† Bonferroni corrections applied for four contrasts involving the control condition of on-screen vibrations only.
6.2. Results
Figure 8 shows the median ratings of the user experience of vibrotactile feedback deliv-
ered according to the four Wear+Touch techniques compared to our control condition
of on-screen vibrations only, while Table 2 highlights statistically significant effects of
the Technique independent variable on our set of eight UX measures.
Overall, all of the positively-connoted UX measures had median ratings above the
neutral level of 3 (“neither agree nor disagree”), but the four Wear+Touch tech-
niques stayed above the median level of 4, corresponding to the “agree” response
for the various statements about Perceived-Enjoyment, Perceived-Efficiency,
Perceived-Confidence, and Perceived-Integration. The expansion technique
was always rated the highest across all of the four positively-connoted UX measures,
21
while the integration between touching the screen and the feeling the corresponding
vibrotactile feedback was favorably perceived with ratings above 4.5 for all of the
conditions of the Technique independent variable; see Figure 8, top. Three of the
negatively-connoted UX measures had median ratings below 2 (“disagree”) and 2.5
(between “disagree” and “neither agree nor disagree”), whereas in the majority of the
cases, the Wear+Touch techniques were rated below or equal to 2, corresponding to the
“disagree” response for the various statements about Perceived-Distracteness,
Perceived-Difficulty, Perceived-Confusion, and Perceived-Complexity,
respectively; see Figure 8, bottom. These results indicate high ratings when the user ex-
perience was characterized with positively connoted descriptors and low ratings when
negatively connoted descriptors were used instead.
We found that Technique had a statistically significant effect ( p<.05 )on just
two of the positively-connoted measures, Perceived-Enjoyment and Perceived-
Efficiency, with medium effect sizes (η2
p=.18); see Table 2 for details. Post-hoc tests
(Bonferroni corrections applied for four contrasts against the condition of on-screen
vibrations only) revealed that the reinforcement and expansion techniques were sig-
nificantly higher rated than on-screen (Mdn=4 and 5 vs. Mdn=3 for Perceived-
Enjoyment and Mdn=4 and 4 vs. Mdn=3 forPerceived-Efficiency, respectively).
These findings reveal a better user experience compared to on-screen vibrations only
in terms of two of the positively-connoted UX measures, while no worse experience was
detected in terms of the negatively-connoted measures. ThePerceived-Complexity
measure revealed more higher ratings, but nevertheless less than the on-screen con-
dition with no statistically significant differences ( p>.05, n.s.). Overall, these results
show a better user experience of complementary vibrations delivered through a wear-
able compared to the implicit control condition of no vibrotactile feedback and also
better compared to the explicit control condition of conventional on-screen vibrations.
7. Conclusion and F uture W ork
We introduced Wear+Touch, a set of four interaction techniques that leverage wearable
devices for delivering vibrotactile feedback during touchscreen input in the form of
addition, reinforcement, extension, and expansion. We demonstrated the technical
feasibility of Wear+Touch and reported better user experience for two specific contexts
of use involving a large touchscreen display and a smartphone.
Interesting future work lies ahead, such as exploring other locations on the body
where to deliver distal vibrotactile feedback during touchscreen input, technical imple-
mentation for more off-the-shelf wearable devices, and evaluating the user experience
of other user groups, including older adults (Sultana and Moffatt, 2019) and chil-
dren (Vatavu et al., 2015). For example, exploration of a diversified set of vibrotactile
feedback patterns for various categories of wearable devices (Aiord˘ achioae et al., 2020;
Ariza et al., 2015; Seifi and Lyons, 2016) represents one future work direction for en-
riching interactions with touchscreen displays. Examples include smartglasses for vi-
brotactile feedback at head level and haptic vests for targeting various locations on the
torso, but also wearables featuring new haptic modalities (Zhu et al., 2020; Mazursky
et al., 2021; Catan˘ a and Vatavu, 2023) and extending Wear+Touch for around-device
interactions (McIntosh et al., 2019). Furthermore, based on prior work that examined
user performance in conditions of distal vibrotactile feedback (Henderson et al., 2019;
Terenti et al., 2024c), we believe that Wear+Touch can also make touchscreen inter-
actions more accurate given the additional layer of vibrotactile feedback, an aspect to
22
be examined closely in future work.
Another interesting direction for future work regards providing software support for
implementing the Wear+Touch techniques into more practical applications, including
for multi-user interaction scenarios. For example, we implemented our demonstrations
of Wear+Touch as individual software applications without a unified development ap-
proach and considering single users only. However, a dedicated software framework
featuring abstract components, services, and data flows would be beneficial for prac-
titioners to guide and support implementation of the Wear+Touch techniques for
various wearable devices and platforms in the tradition of tools such as (Chi and Li,
2015; Shtarbanov, 2021; Schipor and Vatavu, 2023). Of these software components, a
dedicated component would be in charge of discriminating between touches belonging
to different users, for which various techniques are available, including leveraging the
wearable device itself (Bianchi and Je, 2017), vibration sensors (Masson et al., 2017),
or proximity-based inference (Tanase et al., 2008). Software architecture examples that
consider input and output through multiple devices, including wearables (Schipor and
Vatavu, 2023; Schipor et al., 2019) and gesture recognition as a service (Vatavu et al.,
2012b) represent a starting point for more development in multi-user collaborative in-
teraction. Our set of design requirements for compatible wearables, APIs/SDKs, and
types of vibrotactile feedback also represent a good starting point in this direction,
to be extended with design requirements for multi-user interaction in collaborative
tabletop computing (Tang et al., 2006; Morris et al., 2006).
Technical implementation of Wear+Touch involves communications between wear-
able devices and the touchscreen display, including communications through a mid-
dleware mobile application, as employed for the implementation of our experiments.
Our design requirements for compatible wearables center on Bluetooth due to low
energy consumption, but other communications technology are technically feasible for
Wear+Touch, according to the specific wearable platforms and available manufactuter
APIs/SDKs. It is worth noting that any communications technology involves some de-
lays for the delivery of vibrotactile feedback, from the moment when the command is
sent from the touchscreen device, following a touch event, to the moment when it is re-
ceived and implemented by the wearable. We did not find noticeable delays in our pro-
totypes and experiments, also confirmed by high ratings ofPerceived-Integration,
but applications with strict synchronization requirements between touch input and vi-
brotactile output may need further scrutiny.
Lastly, we used in this work VIREO (Terenti and Vatavu, 2023), a free web-based
software tool for authoring vibrotactile patterns, specifically developed for implement-
ing vibrotactile feedback for mobile and wearable devices. Future work can look at
the development of a specialized VIREO module that would enable practitioners to
author synchronized vibrations, delivered through different wearables, for expressive
expansion effects that start on the screen and continue on the arm. We equally see
interesting potential for using Wear+Touch for eyes-free interaction, as in the driv-
ing example illustrated in Figure 1, for which further examination of combined user
performance and user experience is recommended.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of a project that has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 860114.
23
Disclosure statement
No potential competing interest was reported by the author(s).
References
Aiord˘ achioae, A., Gherasim, D., Maciuc, A.-I., Gheran, B.-F., Vatavu, R.-D., 2020. Addressing
inattentional blindness with smart eyewear and vibrotactile feedback on the finger, wrist,
and forearm. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Multimedia. MUM ’20. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 329–331.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3428361.3432080
Ando, H., Miki, T., Inami, M., Maeda, T., 2002. SmartFinger: nail-mounted tactile display. In:
Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference Abstracts and Applications. SIGGRAPH
’02. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 78.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1242073.1242113
Ardito, C., Buono, P., Costabile, M. F., Desolda, G., feb 2015. Interaction with large displays:
A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 47 (3), 1–38.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2682623
Ariza, O., Lubos, P., Steinicke, F., Bruder, G., 2015. Ring-shaped haptic device with vibro-
tactile feedback patterns to support natural spatial interaction. In: Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Artificial Reality and Telexistence and 20th Eurographics Sym-
posium on Virtual Environments. ICAT - EGVE ’15. Eurographics Association, Goslar, p.
175–181.
URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2852313.2852337
Bau, O., Poupyrev, I., jul 2012. Revel: Tactile feedback technology for augmented reality. ACM
Trans. Graph. 31 (4), 1–11.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2185520.2185585
Bau, O., Poupyrev, I., Israr, A., Harrison, C., 2010. TeslaTouch: electrovibration for touch
surfaces. In: Proceedings of the 23nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology. UIST ’10. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 283–292.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1866029.1866074
Bianchi, A., Je, S., 2017. Disambiguating touch with a smart-ring. In: Proceedings of the 8th
Augmented Human International Conference. AH ’17. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–5.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3041164.3041196
Brewster, S., Chohan, F., Brown, L., 2007. Tactile feedback for mobile interactions. In: Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’07.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 159–162.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240649
Catan˘ a, A.-V., Vatavu, R.-D., 2023. Fingerhints: Understanding users’ perceptions of and pref-
erences for on-finger kinesthetic notifications. In: Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’23. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–17.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581022
Chi, P.-Y. P., Li, Y., 2015. Weave: Scripting cross-device wearable interaction. In: Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’15.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 3923–3932.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702451
Dunlop, M. D., Taylor, F., 2009. Tactile feedback for predictive text entry. In: Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’09. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, p. 2257–2260.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1519046
Elkin, L. A., Kay, M., Higgins, J. J., Wobbrock, J. O., 2021. An aligned rank transform proce-
dure for multifactor contrast tests. In: Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM Symposium on
24
User Interface Software and Technology. UIST ’21. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 754–768.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474784
Emgin, S. E., Aghakhani, A., Sezgin, T. M., Basdogan, C., 2019. HapTable: an interactive
tabletop providing online haptic feedback for touch gestures. IEEE Trans. on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 25 (9), 2749–2762.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2855154
Freeman, E., Brewster, S., Lantz, V., 2014. Tactile feedback for above-device gesture interfaces:
Adding touch to touchless interactions. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Multimodal Interaction. ICMI ’14. ACM, p. 419–426.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663204.2663280
Grussenmeyer, W., Folmer, E., jan 2017. Accessible touchscreen technology for people with
visual impairments: A survey. ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 9 (2), 1–31.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3022701
Henderson, J., Avery, J., Grisoni, L., Lank, E., 2019. Leveraging distal vibrotactile feedback for
target acquisition. In: Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–11.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300715
Hoggan, E., Brewster, S. A., Johnston, J., 2008. Investigating the effectiveness of tactile feed-
back for mobile touchscreens. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. CHI ’08. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1573–1582.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357300
Jamalzadeh, M., Rekik, Y., Grisoni, L., Vatavu, R.-D., Volpe, G., Dancu, A., 2023. Effects
of moving speed and phone location on eyes-free gesture input with mobile devices. In:
Human-Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2023. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol
14142. Springer, Cham, pp. 469–478.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-42280-5_30
Jansen, Y., 2010. Mudpad: Fluid haptics for multitouch surfaces. In: Proc. of the CHI Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’10. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, p. 4351–4356.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753846.1754152
Koskinen, E., Kaaresoja, T., Laitinen, P., 2008. Feel-good touch: finding the most pleasant
tactile feedback for a mobile touch screen button. In: Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces. ICMI ’08. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 297–304.
Krol, L. R., Aliakseyeu, D., Subramanian, S., 2009. Haptic feedback in remote pointing. In:
CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’09. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, p. 3763–3768.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1520340.1520568
Le, K.-D., Zhu, K., Kosinski, T., Fjeld, M., Azh, M., Zhao, S., 2016. Ubitile: A finger-worn
I/O device for tabletop vibrotactile pattern authoring. In: Proceedings of the 9th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. NordiCHI ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 1–4.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2996721
Liao, Y.-C., Chen, Y.-C., Chan, L., Chen, B.-Y., 2017. Dwell+: Multi-level mode selection using
vibrotactile cues. In: Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology. UIST ’17. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 5–16.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3126594.3126627
Long, B., Seah, S. A., Carter, T., Subramanian, S., 2014. Rendering volumetric haptic shapes
in mid-air using ultrasound. ACM Trans. Graph. 33 (6), 1–10.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2661229.2661257
Luzhnica, G., Veas, E., 2018. Investigating interactions for text recognition using a vibrotactile
wearable display. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces. IUI ’18. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 453–465.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3172944.3172951
Maeda, T., Peiris, R., Masashi, N., Tanaka, Y., Minamizawa, K., 2016. HapticAid: wearable
25
haptic augmentation system for enhanced, enchanted and empathised haptic experiences.
In: SIGGRAPH ASIA 2016 Emerging Technologies. SA ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 1–2.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2988240.2988253
Magrofuoco, N., Roselli, P., Vanderdonckt, J., jul 2021. Two-dimensional stroke gesture recog-
nition: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (7), 1–36.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3465400
Mart´ ınez, J., Garc´ ıa, A. S., Oliver, M., Molina, J. P., Gonz´ alez, P., 2014. VITAKI: a vi-
brotactile prototyping toolkit for virtual reality and video games. International Journal of
Human–Computer Interaction 30 (11), 855–871.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2014.941272
Masson, D., Goguey, A., Malacria, S., Casiez, G., 2017. WhichFingers: identifying fingers on
touch surfaces and keyboards using vibration sensors. In: Proceedings of the 30th Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. UIST ’17. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, p. 41–48.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3126594.3126619
Mazursky, A., Teng, S.-Y., Nith, R., Lopes, P., 2021. MagnetIO: passive yet interactive soft
haptic patches anywhere. In: Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI ’21. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–15.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445543
McIntosh, J., Strohmeier, P., Knibbe, J., Boring, S., Hornbæk, K., 2019. Magnetips: Combining
fingertip tracking and haptic feedback for around-device interaction. In: Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’19. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, pp. 1–12.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300638
Monnai, Y., Hasegawa, K., Fujiwara, M., Yoshino, K., Inoue, S., Shinoda, H., 2014. Hap-
toMime: mid-air haptic interaction with a floating virtual screen. In: Proceedings of the
27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, p. 663–667.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2642918.2647407
Moon, H. S., Orr, G., Jeon, M., 2023. Hand tracking with vibrotactile feedback enhanced
presence, engagement, usability, and performance in a virtual reality rhythm game. Inter-
national Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 39 (14), 2840–2851.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2087000
Morris, M. R., Huang, A., Paepcke, A., Winograd, T., 2006. Cooperative gestures: multi-user
gestural interactions for co-located groupware. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’06. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1201–
1210.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124952
Poupyrev, I., Okabe, M., Maruyama, S., 2004. Haptic feedback for pen computing: Directions
and strategies. In: CHI ’04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
CHI EA ’04. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1309–1312.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/985921.986051
Schipor, O.-A., Vatavu, R.-D., 2023. GearWheels: a software tool to support user experiments
on gesture input with wearable devices. International Journal of Human–Computer Inter-
action 39 (18), 3527–3545.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2098907
Schipor, O.-A., Vatavu, R.-D., Vanderdonckt, J., 2019. Euphoria: A scalable, event-driven
architecture for designing interactions across heterogeneous devices in smart environments.
Information and Software Technology 109, 43–59.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2019.01.006
Sch¨ onauer, C., Mossel, A., Zaiti, I.-A., Vatavu, R.-D., 2015. Touch, movement & vibration: User
perception of vibrotactile feedback for touch and mid-air gestures. In: Proceedings of the
15th IFIP TC.13 International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. INTERACT
26
’15. Springer, Cham, pp. 165–172.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22723-8_14
Seifi, H., Lyons, K., 2016. Exploring the design space of touch-based vibrotactile interactions
for smartwatches. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers. ISWC ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 156–165.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2971763.2971783
Seifi, H., Zhang, K., MacLean, K. E., 2015. VibViz: Organizing, visualizing and navigating
vibration libraries. In: Proceedings of the IEEE World Haptics Conference. WHC ’15. IEEE,
USA, pp. 254–259.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WHC.2015.7177722
Shtarbanov, A., 2021. Flowio development platform - the pneumatic ”Raspberry Pi” for soft
robotics. In: Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. CHI EA ’21. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–6.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
Stanke, D., Duente, T., Rohs, M., 2020. TactileWear: a comparison of electrotactile and vi-
brotactile feedback on the wrist and ring finger. In: Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Con-
ference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Society. NordiCHI
’20. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–13.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3419249.3420107
Sultana, A., Moffatt, K., feb 2019. Effects of aging on small target selection with touch input.
ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 12 (1), 1–35.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3300178
Tanase, C. A., Vatavu, R.-D., Pentiuc, S.-G., Graur, A., 2008. Detecting and tracking mul-
tiple users in the proximity of interactive tabletops. Advances in Electrical and Computer
Engineering 8 (2), 61–64.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4316/AECE.2008.02011
Tang, A., Tory, M., Po, B., Neumann, P., Carpendale, S., 2006. Collaborative coupling over
tabletop displays. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. CHI ’06. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1181–1190.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124950
Tekli, J., Issa, Y. B., Chbeir, R., 2018. Evaluating touch-screen vibration modality for blind
users to access simple shapes and graphics. International Journal of Human-Computer Stud-
ies 110, 115–133.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2017.10.009
Tennison, J. L., Uesbeck, P. M., Giudice, N. A., Stefik, A., Smith, D. W., Gorlewicz, J. L.,
may 2020. Establishing vibration-based tactile line profiles for use in multimodal graphics.
ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 17 (2), 1–14.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3383457
Terenti, M., Casado-Palacios, M., Gori, M., Vatavu, R.-D., 2024a. What is the user experience
of eyes-free touch input with vibrotactile feedback decoupled from the touchscreen? In:
Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended
Abstracts. CHI ’24 EA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–8.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650804
Terenti, M., Pamparau, C., Vatavu, R.-D., 2024b. The user experience of distal arm-level
vibrotactile feedback for interactions with virtual versus physical displays. Virtual Reality
28 (2), 1–21.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10055-024-00977-2
Terenti, M., Rupin, M., Reynal, B., Grisoni, L., Vatavu, R.-D., 2024c. The eclectic user ex-
perience of combined on-screen and on-wrist vibrotactile feedback in touchscreen input. In:
Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended
Abstracts. CHI ’24 EA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–7.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650835
Terenti, M., Vatavu, R.-D., 2022. Measuring the user experience of vibrotactile feedback on
the finger, wrist, and forearm for touch input on large displays. In: Extended Abstracts of
27
the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’22. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–7.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519704
Terenti, M., Vatavu, R.-D., 2023. Vireo: Web-based graphical authoring of vibrotactile feed-
back for interactions with mobile and wearable devices. International Journal of Hu-
man–Computer Interaction 39 (20), 4162–4180.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2109584
Vatavu, R.-D., 2017. Visual impairments and mobile touchscreen interaction: State-of-the-
art, causes of visual impairment, and design guidelines. International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction 33 (6), 486–509.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2017.1279827
Vatavu, R.-D., Anthony, L., Wobbrock, J. O., 2012a. Gestures as point clouds: a $ p recognizer
for user interface prototypes. In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction. ICMI ’12. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 273–280.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2388676.2388732
Vatavu, R.-D., Anthony, L., Wobbrock, J. O., 2018. $ q: a super-quick, articulation-invariant
stroke-gesture recognizer for low-resource devices. In: Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. MobileHCI
’18. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–12.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3229434.3229465
Vatavu, R.-D., Chera, C. M., Tsai, W.-T., 2012b. Gesture profile for web services: An event-
driven architecture to support gestural interfaces for smart environments. In: Proceedings
of the International Joint Conference on Ambient Intelligence. AmI ’12. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, pp. 161–176.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-34898-3_11
Vatavu, R.-D., Cramariuc, G., Schipor, D. M., 2015. Touch interaction for children aged 3
to 6 years: Experimental findings and relationship to motor skills. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 74, 54–76.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2014.10.007
Vatavu, R.-D., Mossel, A., Sch¨ onauer, C., 2016. Digital vibrons: Understanding users’ per-
ceptions of interacting with invisible, zero-weight matter. In: Proceedings of the 18th In-
ternational Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services.
MobileHCI ’16. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 217–226.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2935334.2935364
Vogels, E. A., 2020. About one-in-five americans use a smart watch or fitness tracker.
URL https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/01/09/
about-one-in-five-americans-use-a-smart-watch-or-fitness-tracker/
Wang, Y., Yu, C., Liu, J., Shi, Y., 2013. Understanding performance of eyes-free, absolute
position control on touchable mobile phones. In: Proceedings of the 15th International Con-
ference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. MobileHCI ’13.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 79–88.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2493190.2493215
Withana, A., Groeger, D., Steimle, J., 2018. Tacttoo: A thin and feel-through tattoo for on-
skin tactile output. In: Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology. UIST ’18. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 365–378.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242645
Wobbrock, J. O., Findlater, L., Gergle, D., Higgins, J. J., 2011. The aligned rank transform
for nonparametric factorial analyses using only anova procedures. In: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’11. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, p. 143–146.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978963
Yamamoto, A., Nagasawa, S., Yamamoto, H., Higuchi, T., 2006. Electrostatic tactile display
with thin film slider and its application to tactile telepresentation systems. IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12 (2), 168–177.
28
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2006.28
Zhang, L., He, W., Cao, Z., Wang, S., Bai, H., Billinghurst, M., 2023. Hapticproxy: Providing
positional vibrotactile feedback on a physical proxy for virtual-real interaction in augmented
reality. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 39 (3), 449–463.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2041895
Zhu, M., Memar, A. H., Gupta, A., Samad, M., Agarwal, P., Visell, Y., Keller, S. J., Colon-
nese, N., 2020. Pneusleeve: In-fabric multimodal actuation and sensing in a soft, compact,
and expressive haptic sleeve. In: Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI ’20. ACM, New York, NY, USA, p. 1–12.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376333
Notes on contributors
Mihail Terenti is a Marie Sk lodowska-Curie Early Stage Researcher at the S ¸tefan cel
Mare University of Suceava, Romania, where he works on multimodal feedback to
augment the user experience of touch input.
Radu-Daniel Vatavu is a Professor of Computer Science at the S ¸tefan cel Mare
University of Suceava, where he directs the Machine Intelligence and Information Vi-
sualization Research Laboratory. His research interests include human-computer in-
teraction, augmented reality, ambient intelligence, and accessible computing.
29