Demonstrating NeuroFlux: A Non-Invasive Peripheral Magnetic 
Stimulation Device for Multimodal Haptic Feedback 
Bingjian Huang 
Dynamic Graphics Project Lab 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
bingjian20@dgp.toronto.edu 
Sam Chin 
MIT Media Lab 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 
chins@mit.edu 
Daniel Wigdor 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
daniel@dgp.toronto.edu 
Joseph A. Paradiso 
MIT Media Lab 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 
paradiso@mit.edu 
Figure 1: NeuroFlux is a wearable armband device using peripheral magnetic stimulation to generate multimodal haptic 
feedback, including muscular movement and tactile sensations. 
Abstract 
We demonstrate NeuroFlux, a wearable armband that delivers mul-
timodal haptic feedback through non-invasive peripheral magnetic 
stimulation. Unlike conventional haptic devices limited to either 
tactile or kinesthetic modalities, NeuroFlux stimulates peripheral 
nerves to independently evoke both muscle movements and lo-
calized skin sensations. Our system features a custom-designed 
control circuit and a multi-coil armband, enabling precise, real-time 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
UIST Adjunct ’25, Busan, Republic of Korea 
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2036-9/25/09 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3746058.3758984 
control of stimulation location and intensity. This hardware inno-
vation significantly expands the design space of haptic feedback by 
bridging kinesthetic and tactile modalities through a single, com-
pact device. In our demonstration, participants will experience a 
wide range of magnetically induced haptic sensations, including 
independent stimulation of muscular and cutaneous nerves in the 
forearm. The setup includes interactive tasks that showcase Neu-
roFlux’s ability to generate diverse haptic effects such as finger 
flexion, wrist movement, as well as immersive virtual reality object 
interactions. By offering hands-on exposure to peripheral magnetic 
stimulation, we aim to spark new research directions in multimodal 
haptic feedback and make neural stimulation more accessible to 
the HCI community. 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Haptic devices. 
UIST Adjunct ’25, September 28–October 01, 2025, Busan, Republic of Korea Huang et al. 
Keywords 
Haptics, Neural Stimulation, Wearable Devices 
ACM Reference Format: 
Bingjian Huang, Sam Chin, Daniel Wigdor, and Joseph A. Paradiso. 2025. 
Demonstrating NeuroFlux: A Non-Invasive Peripheral Magnetic Stimula-
tion Device for Multimodal Haptic Feedback. In The 38th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST Adjunct ’25), 
September 28–October 01, 2025, Busan, Republic of Korea. ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3746058.3758984 
1 Introduction 
Haptic feedback has been a significant part of interactive experi-
ences in extended reality [5], assistive technologies [8], immersive 
art [2], and robot teleoperation [7], etc. Existing haptic feedback 
devices all fall into two categories: tactile feedback and kinesthetic 
feedback [1]. Tactile feedback devices utilize mechanical inden-
tations [18], vibrotactile actuators [6], peltier modules [10] and 
pneumatic / microfluidic chambers [14] to provide localized touch 
sensations on the skin. Kinesthetic feedback devices, on the other 
hand, involve electrical muscle stimulation [9], exoskeleton [11], 
and grounded force feedback controllers [16]. 
While these devices cover a wide range of haptic feedback modal-
ities, each type of device is limited to only one modality. For exam-
ple, vibrotactile devices are designated to produce high-frequency 
vibrations; Pneumatic devices are designated to generate skin inden-
tations; And Exoskeletons are designated to limit limb movements 
and generate force feedback. While electrical muscle stimulation 
is believed to trigger both force and tactile feedback, the tactile 
tingling sensation is more like a "side effect" of the force feedback 
and cannot be controlled independently. In previous attempts to 
integrating multiple types of actuators into one platform [15], re-
searchers discovered that a significant amount of effort is required 
even the integration only involved four tactile modalities. Till this 
date, there lacks an effective solution to providing kinesthetic and 
tactile feedback using one set of hardware configurations. 
In this demonstration, we present NeuroFlux, a wearable hap-
tic feedback armband that uses non-invasive peripheral magnetic 
stimulation to trigger both kinesthetic movements and tactile sen-
sations. NeuroFlux was designed following the idea that all types 
of haptic feedback are transmitted to and from the central nervous 
system via peripheral nerves. Thus, kinesthetic feedback and tactile 
feeback can be triggered independently through precise control of 
stimulation points on different neural pathways. 
Compared with previous HCI work that uses existing medical-
grade magnetic stimulation devices [17], we designed and built our 
own peripheral magnetic stimulation device, with reduced form 
factor, improved wearing comfort, customized coil design, and pre-
cise control over stimulation parameters. NeuroFlux consists of two 
parts, the desktop control circuit, and the multi-coil armband. The 
control circuit receives Bluetooth trigger commands from the inter-
action program, and activates the corresponding electromagnetic 
coil. The coil generates a transient magnetic field and induces eddy 
currents inside the nerves underneath the skin. Depending on the 
type of nerves, the coil could either trigger muscle movements via 
muscular nerves, or trigger skin sensations via cutaneous nerves. 
Our evaluation demonstrates that NeuroFlux can independently 
trigger muscular nerves and cutaneous nerves inside median, ulnar, 
and radial nerves of the forearm, producing a great variety of haptic 
feedback sensations on the hand. 
The goal of this demonstration is to introduce the concept of 
peripheral magnetic stimulation to the UIST haptics community, 
and showcase the potential of neural stimulation to generate mul-
timodal haptic feedback. We hope that by providing first-hand 
experience of magnetically induced haptic feedback sensations to 
researchers, this will inspire more ideas on novel applications of 
this emerging technology. 
2 NeuroFlux Device Overview 
We provide an overview of the NeuroFlux device implementation, 
including control circuit, electromagnetic coil, and mounting parts. 
2.1 Control Circuit 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) works by discharging 
a high-current pulse through a wire coil to create a brief, rapidly 
changing magnetic field, which penetrates the scalp and skull with-
out attenuation and induces a suprathreshold electrical current in 
the brain via electromagnetic induction [13]. This current can be 
delivered in monophasic or biphasic pulses, each affecting neuronal 
stimulation differently. Peripheral Magnetic Stimulation (PMS) oper-
ates on the same principle as TMS, using rapidly changing magnetic 
fields generated by high-current pulses through a coil to induce 
electrical currents in peripheral nerves or muscles. These induced 
currents can activate neuromuscular pathways noninvasively, en-
abling stimulation of limbs or targeted body regions without direct 
skin contact. 
Peripheral magnetic stimulation requires the control circuit to 
discharge a significant amount of current (1kA) in a very short 
pulse (400us). To achieve this, the main components of the control 
circuit include a high-voltage DC-DC power converter and a charge-
discharge control circuit (Figure 2). the power converter takes 15V 
power bench supply as input, and outputs 750V to the charge circuit. 
The control circuit uses the high voltage input to slowly charge up 
two 150uF capacitor, and when it receives a triggering command, it 
turns on the IGBT, and activates the coil. 
2.2 Electromagnetic Coil Design 
Electromagnetic coils are designed to focus on individual nerves in 
the arm, in order to trigger different kinesthetic feedback and tactile 
sensations on the hand. This requires customized coils to adapt 
to different nerve positions and depths. In prior work, researchers 
used electromagnetic simulations to evaluate the focality and depth 
of various coil designs [4]. Simultion results showed that Figure-8 
coils, with two spiral coils connected in a "8" shape, have the best 
performance in both metrics. However, these prior evaluations are 
targeting transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and designs are 
based on the human skull model. For our peripheral stimulation 
device, nerves are much more superficial underneath the skin and 
the major nerve bundles are more spatially separated from each 
other. Therefore, coils can be designed with smaller diameters, less 
turns, and more curvature. 
Our coil is a Figure-8 shape coil with two spiral coils connected 
together (Figure 3. Each spiral coil uses 40 turns of rectangular 
NeuroFlux UIST Adjunct ’25, September 28–October 01, 2025, Busan, Republic of Korea 
1
2
3
4 5
6
7
8
1EDI20I12AF
IXGN200N170
IGBT
R1
1
R2
2.2 R3
1k
V1
15V
V2
750V
R4
270k
R5
10Meg
D1
D
C1
100nF
C2
100µF
C3
100µF
C4
100µF
C5
100µF
R6
10Meg
R7
10Meg
L1
50µHR8
47
Figure 2: Top: Schematic diagram of the control circuit design. 
Bottom: Top-down view of the actual control circuit. 
copper wires, with inner diameter of 10 mm and outer diameter 
of 60 mm. The coils were winded in opposite direction so that the 
magnetic fields complement each other. Unlike classic TMS coils 
that use a between-coil angle of 120-150 degree, the two spiral 
coils in our coil have an angle of 90 degree, wrapping more tightly 
around the arm surface and forming a strong magnetic gradient 
in the deeper tissue. This allows us to stimulate muscular nerves, 
which are innervated deeper in the muscle tissues. Electromagnetic 
field simulation in Ansys Maxwell (Figure 3 showed that with 1kA 
current input, the coil can generate up to 1.5T magnetic flux in the 
center, surpassing nerve activation thresholds [13]. 
2.3 Mounting Parts 
We also designed a customized armband to mount the coil onto 
users’ arms (Figure 4). The armband has a round curvature inside to 
fit users’ arms and two flat surfaces outside to attach the Figure-8 
coils. Inside the structure, we created two thin tunnels to allow 
stretchable round strings to go through, and the extruded strings 
are connected to a cord lock and can be adjusted as needed. This 
mounting mechanism ensures that the armband fits perfect22ly to 
arms with different curvatures and sizes, providing a consistent 
experience across users. 
3 Demonstration Design 
An interactive environment (Figure 5) will be setup to allow au-
dience to experience NeuroFlux. The goal of this demonstration 
is to introduce the concept of peripheral magnetic stimulation to 
Figure 3: Top: Front view of the Figure-8 coil design. Bottom: 
Magnetic flux visualization of the Ansys electromagnetic 
field simulation. 
Figure 4: NeuroFlux does not require skin contact and can be 
mounted on top of garments. The tightness of the armband 
can be adjusted with cord locks to adapt to different users. 
the UIST haptics community, and showcase the potential of neural 
stimulation to generate multimodal haptic feedback. 
3.1 Demonstration Space Layout 
The demonstration area will be organized with several key compo-
nents to facilitate interaction and learning: 
UIST Adjunct ’25, September 28–October 01, 2025, Busan, Republic of Korea Huang et al. 
Figure 5: Floor plan of the demonstration setup. Interaction 
mainly happens at the table, while the poster and the monitor 
serve the purpose of attracting audience. 
• Project poster: A large, visually appealing poster will be 
prominently displayed to provide a quick overview of the 
project, highlighting its key features and benefits. This poster 
will serve as an initial engagement point for attendees. 
• Introduction video: A monitor will play a looping video that 
introduces the neural mechanisms behind the peripheral 
magnetic stimulation, implementation of the NeuroFlux de-
vice, and recordings showing NeuroFlux activating different 
nerves and inducing muscular movements. The video will 
help in setting the context and enhancing understanding 
among the audience. 
• Interaction area: The NeuroFlux device will be placed on a 
table, allowing audience to try it on. Currently the NeuroFlux 
device includes one power bench supply, one control circuit 
PCB board, and one mounting device with coils. The control 
circuit will be placed in an insulated acrylic box, to prevent 
participants from touching the high voltage components. 
Participants will only have access to the mounting coils, 
which are wrapped with electrically isolated epoxy resin to 
prevent accidental conduction. 
3.2 Interactive Experience 
To ensure safety and maximize engagement and demonstrate Neu-
roFlux’s capabilities, the interactive experience will contain the 
following steps: 
(1) Preparation: The participant will first sign a liability waiver, 
then the authors will help the participant to put on the device, 
and tighten the strap with cord lock. 
(2) Individual Calibration: The authors will begin the stimula-
tion at relatively low voltage input (600V), and gradually 
increase the voltage until the participant reports that the 
tactile sensation is felt clearly. This voltage will be set as 
the detection threshold for the participants. The authors 
will continue to increase the voltage to a level when the 
participant reports that it is too strong, which is set as the 
maximum threshold. Then the stimulation voltage during 
the experience is set as the average of the two thresholds. 
(3) Nerve Activation: The NeuroFlux device will be placed on 
the wrist near the median nerve during the calibration. This 
will trigger strong tactile sensations on the thumb, index, and 
middle fingers. Then the device will be moved to the ulnar 
nerve and radial nerve area of the wrist to trigger tactile 
sensations on other fingers. If the participant is comfortable 
with the tactile feedback, the device will be moved to lower 
arm near the elbow to trigger muscular movements, with 
wrist reflex, extension, and tilt movements. 
(4) Virtual Reality Experience: NeuroFlux will serve as the haptic 
interface to provide prompting haptic feedback for object 
interaction in VR. The participant wearing the VR headset 
will see several objects floating in front of the view. When the 
participant reaches their hands within the range of a red cube, 
the participant will feel that its hand is pushed back from 
the cube, indicating that the object is not touchable. When 
the participants grasps a green sphere, tactile sensations will 
be triggered in the touching area between the sphere and 
the hand, which means safe to touch. 
3.3 Safety Measurements 
Magnetic stimulation is a FDA approved technology widely used 
in clinical applications [3], reflecting its overall safety. While mag-
netic stimulation carries some minor risks such as skin tingling or 
potential interference with implanted medical devices. these effects 
are generally preventable through appropriate participant screen-
ing and careful control of stimulation settings. A safety and ethics 
report on TMS concluded that no persistent adverse effects—such 
as seizures—have been observed when the technique is used in 
individuals without epilepsy [12]. Prior HCI work using magnetic 
stimulation for haptic interactions [17] provides clear evidence that 
the technique is safe to operate on human subjects. 
3.4 Expected Outcome 
We expect that NeuroFlux will open up the world of neural stimula-
tion to HCI and haptics researchers. We hope that by providing first-
hand experience of magnetically induced haptic feedback sensations 
to researchers, this will inspire more ideas of novel applications 
in haptics, sensory augmentation, healthcare and human-robot 
interaction, etc. 
4 Conclusion 
This demonstration presents a novel haptic interaction device, Neu-
roFlux, which leverages peripheral magnetic stimulation to render 
multimodal haptic feedback on the hand. Through an interactive 
demonstration space, participants will gain firsthand experience of 
the magnetically induced force and tactile feedback. This demonstra-
tion aims to enhance the communication between HCI and haptic 
researchers and spark potential collaborations in future projects. 
NeuroFlux UIST Adjunct ’25, September 28–October 01, 2025, Busan, Republic of Korea 
Acknowledgments 
We sincerely thank Mark Feldmeier for his generous help during 
the prototype development process. This device would not have 
been possible without his invaluable support. 
References 
[1] Mark Bear, Barry Connors, and Michael A Paradiso. 2020. Neuroscience: Exploring 
the brain, enhanced edition: Exploring the brain. Jones & Bartlett Learning. 
[2] Sophia Brueckner and Rachel Freire. 2018. Embodisuit: a wearable platform for 
embodied knowledge. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on 
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. 542–548. 
[3] Samantha L Cohen, Marom Bikson, Bashar W Badran, and Mark S George. 2021. 
A visual and narrative timeline of US FDA milestones for Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation (TMS) devices. Brain stimulation 15, 1 (2021), 73. 
[4] Zhi-De Deng, Sarah H Lisanby, and Angel V Peterchev. 2013. Electric field depth– 
focality tradeoff in transcranial magnetic stimulation: simulation comparison of 
50 coil designs. Brain stimulation 6, 1 (2013), 1–13. 
[5] Martin Feick, Scott Bateman, Anthony Tang, André Miede, and Nicolai Marquardt. 
2020. Tangi: Tangible proxies for embodied object exploration and manipulation 
in virtual reality. In 2020 IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented 
reality (ISMAR). IEEE, 195–206. 
[6] Bingjian Huang, Siyi Ren, Yuewen Luo, Qilong Cheng, Hanfeng Cai, Yeqi Sang, 
Mauricio Sousa, Paul H Dietz, and Daniel Wigdor. 2025. VibraForge: A Scalable 
Prototyping Toolkit For Creating Spatialized Vibrotactile Feedback Systems. In 
Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
1–18. 
[7] Bingjian Huang, Zhecheng Wang, Qilong Cheng, Siyi Ren, Hanfeng Cai, Anto-
nio Alvarez Valdivia, Karthik Mahadevan, and Daniel Wigdor. 2024. AeroHaptix: 
A Wearable Vibrotactile Feedback System for Enhancing Collision Avoidance in 
UAV Teleoperation. arXiv:2407.12105 [cs.RO] https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12105 
[8] Jiasheng Li, Zeyu Yan, Ebrima Haddy Jarjue, Ashrith Shetty, and Huaishu Peng. 
2022. Tangiblegrid: Tangible web layout design for blind users. In Proceedings 
of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 
1–12. 
[9] Pedro Lopes, Sijing You, Lung-Pan Cheng, Sebastian Marwecki, and Patrick 
Baudisch. 2017. Providing Haptics to Walls & Heavy Objects in Virtual Reality by 
Means of Electrical Muscle Stimulation. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1471–1482. doi:10. 
1145/3025453.3025600 
[10] Alex Mazursky, Jas Brooks, Beza Desta, and Pedro Lopes. 2024. ThermalGrasp: 
Enabling Thermal Feedback even while Grasping and Walking. In 2024 IEEE 
Conference Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR). IEEE, 342–353. 
[11] Carine Rognon, Stefano Mintchev, Fabio Dell’Agnola, Alexandre Cherpillod, 
David Atienza, and Dario Floreano. 2018. Flyjacket: An upper body soft exoskele-
ton for immersive drone control. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 3, 3 (2018), 
2362–2369. 
[12] Simone Rossi, Andrea Antal, Sven Bestmann, Marom Bikson, Carmen Brewer, 
Jürgen Brockmöller, Linda L Carpenter, Massimo Cincotta, Robert Chen, Jeff D 
Daskalakis, et al. 2021. Safety and recommendations for TMS use in healthy 
subjects and patient populations, with updates on training, ethical and regulatory 
issues: Expert Guidelines. Clinical Neurophysiology 132, 1 (2021), 269–306. 
[13] Paolo Maria Rossini, David Burke, Robert Chen, Leonardo G Cohen, Zafiris 
Daskalakis, R Di Iorio, Vincenzo Di Lazzaro, F Ferreri, PB Fitzgerald, Mark S 
George, et al. 2015. Non-invasive electrical and magnetic stimulation of the 
brain, spinal cord, roots and peripheral nerves: Basic principles and procedures 
for routine clinical and research application. An updated report from an IFCN 
Committee. Clinical neurophysiology 126, 6 (2015), 1071–1107. 
[14] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. Flowio development platform–the pneumatic “raspberry 
pi” for soft robotics. In Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems. 1–6. 
[15] Ali Shtarbanov, Mengjia Zhu, Nicholas Colonnese, and Amirhossein Haji-
agha Memar. 2023. SleeveIO: modular and reconfigurable platform for multimodal 
wearable haptic feedback interactions. In Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM 
symposium on user interface software and technology. 1–15. 
[16] 3D Syst. 2024. Touch Haptic Device. https://www.3dsystems.com/haptics-
devices/touch. Accessed: Feb 24, 2024. 
[17] Yudai Tanaka, Jacob Serfaty, and Pedro Lopes. 2024. Haptic source-effector: 
full-body haptics via non-invasive brain stimulation. In Proceedings of the 2024 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–15. 
[18] Ran Zhou, Zachary Schwemler, Akshay Baweja, Harpreet Sareen, Casey Lee 
Hunt, and Daniel Leithinger. 2023. Tactorbots: a haptic design toolkit for out-
of-lab exploration of emotional robotic touch. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19. 