IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025 2399
Single Pump-V alve Pneumatic Actuation With
Continuous Flow Rate Control for Soft Robots
Sicong Liu , Member , IEEE, Lin Wang, Zhongfeng Qian, Dihan Liu, Wenpei Zhu ,
Shaowu Tang , Graduate Student Member , IEEE, Xuda Zhao, Wenjian Y ang , Ying Lu, Juan Yi , Member , IEEE,
Jian S. Dai , Fellow, IEEE, and Zheng Wang , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Pneumatic actuated soft robots attract increasing in-
terest of the researchers due to the availability and simplicity
in actuation. The soft robots driven by soft pneumatic actuators
(SPAs) of various active volumes demand pneumatic systems with
various range of ﬂow rate. However, the usually bulky and hard-
to-carry pneumatic actuation systems restrict the portability, and
the air pumps provide constant ﬂow rate which constrained the
applications such as soft wearable devices and scenarios require
ﬁne ﬂow rate control. In this work, aiming for simplicity, high
portability, continuous and small ﬂow rate regulation, the pneu-
matic actuation system consists of identical integrated soft robotic
drivers (iSoRD) modules is proposed, obtaining positive and neg-
ative pressure output ( −53∼83 kPa) in each module using one-
pump-one-valve (4-way/2-position solenoid) design. With the check
valves installed and the modular design, pressure holding and ﬂow
independence are achieved in each pneumatic branch. The heat
generation (37.7 °C) and power consumption (2.95 W per-channel)
are measure to verify usability. The continuous and ﬁne ﬂow rate
regulation (15 mL/s) is achieved by applying the PID controller
on the pump motor, which shows superior performance in signal
tracking in comparison with the non-continuous Bang-Bang and
Varia-speed Bang-Bang algorithms. With the same control, the
iSoRD system reduces the error by 37.5% in comparison to our
previous two-pump system. The portability, versatility in wearing,
practicality and adaptivity of the system are validated by driving
Received 2 August 2024; accepted 8 January 2025. Date of publication
17 January 2025; date of current version 29 January 2025. This article was
recommended for publication by Associate Editor R. Diteesawat and Editor C.
Laschi upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported
in part by the NSFC under Grant 52475302, in part by the National Key
R&D Program of China under Grant 2022YFB4701200, in part by Shenzhen
Science and Technology Program under Grant JCYJ20220530114615034 and
Grant JCYJ20220818100417038, and in part by the Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Morphing Mechanisms and Adaptive Robotics under
Grant 2023B1212010005. (Sicong Liu, Lin Wang, and Zhongfeng Qian are
co-ﬁrst authors.) (Corresponding authors: Jian S. Dai; Zheng Wang.)
Sicong Liu is with the Sino-German College of Intelligent Manufacturing,
Shenzhen Technology University, Pingshan 518118, China (e-mail: liusicong
@sztu.edu.cn).
Lin Wang, Zhongfeng Qian, Juan Yi, and Zheng Wang are with Wis-
son Robotics, Shenzhen 518001, China (e-mail: wanglin@wissonrobotics.
com; qianzf@wissonrobotics.com; yijuan2603@outlook.com; zheng.wang@
ieee.org).
Dihan Liu, Wenpei Zhu, Shaowu Tang, Xuda Zhao, Wenjian Y ang, Ying Lu,
and Jian S. Dai are with the Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518000, China
(e-mail: 11912532@mail.sustech.edu.cn; 11930368@mail.sustech.edu.cn;
12232306@mail.sustech.edu.cn; 12010325@mail.sustech.edu.cn; 12232351@
mail.sustech.edu.cn; 11910835@mail.sustech.edu.cn; daijs@sustech.edu.cn).
This letter has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2025.3531147, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2025.3531147
three wearable soft robots, a small gripper and a pollination device.
Comparing with the existing, the iSoRD is capable of ﬁne ﬂow rate
regulation in both negative and positive pressure range with low
power consumption, portability and versatility, which will beneﬁt
the pneumatic soft robotic systems with broadened application
potential.
Index Terms —Soft robotic actuation, pneumatic actuation,
continuous ﬂow regulation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
S
OFT robotics emerges as one of the prosperous robotic
ﬁelds, bringing enlightenment in aspects of robotic re-
searches covering from design, fabrication to control. Beneﬁting
from the properties of soft material, soft robots have dived
into a wide range of application areas like deep-sea explo-
ration [1], [2], [3], rehabilitation [4], [5], [6], robotic-assisted
surgery [7], [8], [9], dexterous manipulation [10], [11], [12] and
etc.
Pneumatic actuated soft robots attract interest of the re-
searchers due to the availability and simplicity in actuation [13],
[14]. Beneﬁting from the inherent compliance, soft robots driven
by soft pneumatic actuators (SPAs) can interact with the external
environment through safe and adaptive contacts[15], [16].S P A s
are much lighter than conventional actuators like electric motors
and air pumps. Based on such merits, SPAs are suitable for
constituting portable and wearable soft robotic systems which
demand safe human-robot interaction, such as the exoskeletons
that are lightweight and non-restrictive to the wearer [5], [6],
[17], rehabilitation devices that provide convenient at-home use
[4], [18], and supernumerary limbs [19], [20] that adaptively
perform tasks interacting with objects of various rigidity and
shape. While the typical functional end-effector such as the
soft robotic glove are complaint and light weight in general,
the restriction of the portability lies on the actuation systems,
which are usually bulky and hard to be carried around due to the
size, weight and complexity of the assembly. Also, the actuation
system with constant air ﬂow from the pump constrained the
low-level control performance, which obstacles the soft devices
to output smooth motions and the application on devices in need
of small ﬂow rate.
Pioneering research works were conducted on pneumatic
actuation systems for soft robots, which can be categorized
into two types according to the pressure generation mechanism:
using syringe and using pump. Linear motor is used to push and
pull syringe to regulate the pressure smoothly by continuous
and high-bandwidth motion [21]. Sridar et al. [22] proposes
2377-3766 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2400 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
a portable pressure source in need of backpack-size space to
accommodate the syringe and linear motor. Due to the com-
pressibility of air, large cylinders and long-stroke linear motors
are required to generate high pressure, which makes the system
bulkier than solutions with pumps and valves. In contrast, the
pump-valve system obtains portability, such as the ﬂuid control
board in [23] uses pumps as the pneumatic pressure source
and solenoid valves to regulate the pressure. The pump-valve
solution is shown to be effective and easy implementable for the
soft robotic applications.
Much recent researches have achieved continuous ﬂow rate
regulation using dedicated valves in the pump and valve systems,
such as the proportional valves in [20], [24] and the high-speed
solenoid valves in [25]. But challenges remain, namely, the
proportional valves request the minimum supply pressure higher
than 200 kPa which is beyond the maximum pressure of the
portable-sized pump at about 200 kPa, and using the high-speed
switching of the solenoid valves (1000 Hz) to regulate the
ﬂow requires high power consumption about 40W. Thus, these
solutions are yet to satisfy the requirements for simplicity and
high portability. Recently, a novel actuation system is proposed
in [26], which provides both positive and negative pressures
using one pump and three solenoid valves to drive one actuator,
regulates ﬂow rate by two level of pump speed instead of using
valve, showing the potential of using pump for ﬂow rate control.
Pneumatic actuation systems cater to different gas volume
or ﬂow rate needs of a variety of applications, ranging from
wearable robots [4], [5], [19], soft grippers, soft actuator, to
pollen pollination with volume about 65 ml, 22 ml, 8 ml, and
0.33 ml, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). To control
airﬂow, micro-actuators often utilize a syringe pump or manual
injection control [27]. Pollination devices for different ﬂowers
are required to apply varying amounts of pollen proprel and
regulate by the ﬂow rate of the pneumatic source, and the
conventional devices often rely on the large-scale spraying to
ensure success-rate, which leads to wastage [28], [29], [30].
Therefore, a ﬂow rate controllable pneumatic source with a
extend range is needed for adaptivity and efﬁciency.
In this work, we propose a pneumatic actuation system with
one pump and one valve in each channel providing continuous
positive and negative pressures, with simple control logic and
higher tracking accuracy to dynamic signals using continuous
PID control. Such a system can be integrated into a ﬂat and soft
strip for versatile on-body wearing positions, driving soft robotic
systems and a pollination device. The contribution of this paper
can be summarized as follow:
1) A pneumatic actuation system consists of identical inte-
grated soft robotic drivers (iSoRD) is proposed. With a
simple one-pump-one-valve modular design, the iSoRD
innovatively achieve ﬁne ﬂow rate regulation with low
power consumption in both negative and positive pressure
output when compared to the relevant actuation systems.
2) The continuous ﬂow rate regulation is achieved by apply-
ing PID control on the pump of iSoRD, which achieves
superior performance in pressure signal tracking when
compared with the non-continuous control methods.
3) The iSoRD system show portability and adaptivity in
demonstrations of driving a series of soft robotic devices
and a pollination device. The excellence in delivering sta-
ble control over small ﬂow rate is veriﬁed by experiments.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II proposes the
pneumatic design, implementation and control of the iSoRD
Fig. 1. Concept and design of the iSoRD pneumatic actuation. (a) The pneu-
matic system with identical integrated soft robotic drivers (iSoRD) is aimed
to meet the requirement of soft robots and pneumatic devices with a range of
chamber volumes and ﬂow rates. (b) The structure, working modes and logic
scheme of iSoRD. (c) The components and size measurement of an iSoRD
unit. (d) The front view and back view of the control board integrated with
microprocessors, connectors, etc. (e) The wiring and signal transmission logic
on the control board.
system. Section III validates the performance and control of
the pneumatic system in experiments. Section IV demonstrates
the application on devices that demand different ﬂow rates. A
conclusion is drawn in Section V with future work presented.
II. D ESIGN AND IMPLEMENTA TION OF ISORD
A. Pneumatic Design
An integrated unit that provides positive or negative pneu-
matic pressure for SPA and adjusts the rate of pressure change
use only one small-sized pumps is in favor as shown in Fig.1(b).
While compact in dimensions, having the potential to realize
pressure holding and ﬂow rate control as the peristaltic pump in
[42], the ﬂow rate of diaphragm pump is about 5-6 times higher
than that of the similar-sized peristaltic pump (about 200 ∼
300 ml/min), which provides sufﬁcient performance to support
the SPA for dynamic motions. Hence, diaphragm pump is chosen
as the air source as shown in Fig.1(c). Since the diaphragm pump
use one-way valve to generate stable directional pneumatic ﬂow,
the ﬂow direction of each port is ﬁxed, i.e., the direction of ﬂow
cannot be regulated by changing the rotation direction of the
motor in the pump. Thus, a 4-way/2-position (4W2P) solenoid
valve is used to control the direction of ﬂow.
As shown in the working logic of the pneumatic design in
Fig. 1(b), when the actuator is connected to the outlet of the pump
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LIU et al.: SINGLE PUMP-V AL VE PNEUMA TIC ACTUA TION WITH CONTINUOUS FLOW RA TE CONTROL FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2401
Fig. 2. The computing logic of the PID controller.
through the 4W2P valve and the inlet of the pump is connected
to atmosphere, the actuator is in inﬂation state subjected to
positive pressure. To change the direction of the ﬂow, the actuator
is switched to the inlet of the pump by the 4W2P valve and
enter the deﬂation state under negative pressure. The ﬂow rate
is controlled by regulating the speed of the pump motor. To
achieve pressure holding, two one-way check valves are installed
between the pump and the 4W2P valve to prevent leakage. The
check valve at the outlet port of pump prevents air to ﬂow from
the 4W2P valve back to the pump, and vice versa at the inlet
port.
B. System Implementation
The implementation of an iSoRD unit is shown in Fig. 1(c),
including a diaphragm pump (YW11-BLDC, Y uanwang Fluid
Technology), a 4W2P solenoid valves (VQD1121-5L-M5,
SMC), and a pneumatic pressure sensor (XGZP6857A, ±100
kPa, 1%, CFSensor Inc.). Both ports of the diaphragm pump
are connected to the two 4W2P valves, and each branch has a
one-way check valve to ensure airtightness. The resultant size
of the iSoRD unit is measured 111.6 mm in length, 17.5 mm in
width and 55.25 mm in height, with the proﬁle approximately
the size of the palm.
The integrated physical control hardware is shown in
Fig. 1(d), with the wiring and signal transmission shown in
Fig. 1(e). The optocoupler isolation module (BG0B-04N, Shen-
zhen Biaokong Co., Ltd.) is used to control the valve. The
diaphragm pump is driven by a DC motor with a built-in
driver board. The pump receives the control of Pulse-Width
Modulation (PWM) signal from the MCU (STM32F767IGT6,
STMicroelectronics) to regulate the motor speed continuously.
The Analog-to-Digital Converter ADC (AD7606, Analog De-
vices, Inc.) transfers data with MCU through Serial Peripheral
Interface (SPI). The size of the overall control board is 90 mm
by 60 mm.
C. Control of iSoRD
The pump ﬂow can be continuously adjusted by the motor,
therefore, a continuous controller is needed to improve the accu-
racy and speed of the system. The complex and high dynamics
of the pumps and valves, and the compressibility of air make
it difﬁcult to establish a stable control model for the iSoRD
system, so a model-free control method is selected in this paper.
The PID controller with saturation output was chosen due to its
simplicity and efﬁciency. The block diagram of the controller
is shown in Fig. 2. The PID controller takes the error between
the target and feedback pressure as input. The PID controller
formula is expressed as follows [31]:
u (t)= Kp e (t)+ Ki ∫e (t)dt +Kd
de (t)
dt , (1)
where e(t)= PrT −PrF is the difference between the target
pressure signal PrT and the feedback signal PrF . Kp, Ki and
Kd are the proportional, integral, and derivative gains of the PID
controller.
Due to the limitation of the pump speed, the integral term
increases rapidly when tracking fast signals. When the error
decreases, the residential integral value will keep the output of
the system to be excessively large for a long period. Therefore,
the integral of the error is processed as the saturation, which can
be expressed as:
Ki
∫ ts
t0
e (τ)dτ=
{
IMA X,K i
∫ ts
t0
e (τ)dτ > IMA X
−IMA X,K i
∫ ts
t0
e (τ)dτ <−IMA X
,
(2)
where IMA X is the maximum allowed integral term. Since the
output of PID controller is in the form of duty cycle, and the duty
cycle value range is [0, 100], a saturation processing is added
after the output of PID controller and is expressed as:
u (t)
{100,u (t) > 100;
−100,u (t) < −100. (3)
The ﬁnal output will be decomposed into two values, one
value is the absolute value of the output, used to control the
pump duty ratio, the other value is the symbol of the output to
control the on/off of the valve.
III. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDA TION
A. Airtightness and Flow Independence
To validate the pressure holding of iSoRD with check valves,
two types of pneumatic circuits are conﬁgured with and without
the check valves between the pump and 4W2P valve as shown
in Fig. 3(a). Step signal is given as system input to switch the
pressure of the actuator between positive and negative for the
inﬂation and deﬂation, respectively. After reaching the given
pressure, the system is controlled to stay in the holding stage.
The airtight effect of the system is determined by observing the
pressure change.
The experimental results are plotted in Fig. 3(b) and (c).I n
the deﬂation tests, the systems are given target pressure 80kPa,
and in the inﬂation test 120 kPa. After reaching the target
values, pressure in the system without the check valves start
to change immediately after the system switched to the holding
stage and eventually reached atmospheric pressure, indicating a
constant leakage of air. In contrast, the pressures in the proposed
system with check valves changes slightly at ﬁrst. After a short
period, the pressures reached to the constant values in both cases,
validating the airtightness in the iSoRD.
The two-pump pneumatic actuation system developed in our
previous works[32] is used to compare with the iSoRD as shown
in Fig. 3(d). In the two-pump system, the positive and negative
pressures are generated by the respectively assigned pumps,
which provide pneumatic source for multiple channels. Each
channel connects to an actuator through a valve. The pressure
in each channel is regulated by the on and off of the valve.
Since the total ﬂows of the pumps are limited, when multiple
actuators are driven simultaneous with the valves functioning,
the ﬂows in activated channels will interfere with each other
due to pressure differences, causing unstable behaviors of the
actuators. In contrast, each actuator is driven by an independent
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2402 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
Fig. 3. Experimental validation on pressure holding and ﬂow independence.
(a) Experiment setup of the airtightness test. (b) Performance comparison of
with and without check valve when holding negative pressure and (c) positive
pressure. (d) Experiment setup of the ﬂow independence performance on the
two-pump system and the iSoRD system. (e) The sudden drops in the curves
indicate the interference in the two-pump system. Single stands for only one
channel are working in the system as the reference. Dual stands for both of the
channels working simultaneously. (f) Flow independence performance of the
iSoRDs system show no interference. (g) Thermal radiation of the pump.
unit in the proposed system, the ﬂow paths of actuators are not
connected which will avoid the interference.
The experiments are carried out in the iSoRD and two-
pump systems with two channels connected with two bellows
respectively. During the disturbance test, the two channels work
simultaneously. In the two-pump system, two channels are
connected when the valves are activated and the air pressure
are neutralized to the same as shown in Fig. 3(e). Both of the
curves show sudden drop behaviors, corresponding to the axial
jitters of the actuators. While in the iSoRD system, there is no
obvious change of the behavior in the actuators, indicating no
interference in ﬂow rate or pressure when two actuators are
pressurized simultaneously as shown in Fig. 3(f). Thus, the
iSoRD system drives the actuators without ﬂow interference.
B. Power Consumption and Heat Generation
The power consumption of the iSoRD system is investigated
in a free-load test, in which the pumps and valves are program
to continuously run without load. The power consumption is
recorded by the power supply instrument (UTi120S, Uni-Trend
Co., Ltd.) as 11.8 W, and listed in Table I. Comparing with
the existing systems, the proposed shows the lowest power
consumption per-channel 2.95 W among the ones capable of
the ﬂow-rate regulation in both negative and positive pressure
range.
Fig. 4. Parameter tuning of PID controller and step signal tracking. (a)
Performance of parameter set P = 25, I = 0.01, D = 0, as a typical example.
(b) Absolute error distribution of tested parameter in PID parameter tuning, and
the horizontal axis is the PID parameter sets. (c) Accumulated valve switching
times and standard deviation of absolute error in PID parameter tuning, and the
horizontal axis is the PID parameter sets. (d) Performance of non-continuous
Bang-Bang control with dead zone of 1 kPa, and (e) PID control in step signal
tracking are compared.
The heat generation of the iSoRD is measured in a test, where
the pump was set to run full power for 10 mins. During the test,
the maximum surface temperature is measured as 37.7 °Celsius
(UTi120S, Uni-Trend Co., Ltd.) as shown in the recorded in-
frared image in Fig. 3(g). The heat generation is lower than that
of the soft robotic wearable system’s 41 °Celsius in[36] as listed
in TableI, validating the acceptable heat generation and usability
of iSoRD.
C. PID Continuous Control
To investigate the inﬂuence of the PID parameters on the
performance of the iSoRD system (see Fig. 4(a)), three statistics
are used: the mean absolute error (see Fig. 4(b)), which directly
reﬂects the accuracy of controller, the standard deviation of abso-
lute error and accumulated valve switching times (see Fig.4(c)),
which reﬂect the volatility of the control. The experiment is setup
using a single iSoRD unit, Sine wave is chosen as the test signal
with cycle time of T = 10 s and amplitude of 20 kPa.
PID parameters are regulated similar to the Ziegler-Nichols
tuning method [33]. By regulating P term, the error reduces for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LIU et al.: SINGLE PUMP-V AL VE PNEUMA TIC ACTUA TION WITH CONTINUOUS FLOW RA TE CONTROL FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2403
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF PNEUMA TICACTUA TIONSYSTEMS FOR SOFT ROBOTICS
58% from point A (P = 10) to B (P = 30), the standard deviation
reduces for 72% from point C (P = 10) to D (P = 25). Aim for
fewer switching times of the motor direction, aside from low
mean error and standard deviation, P = 25 is chosen. A small
number of increments of the I term reduces mean error and
standard deviation without increasing the switching times. The
error is reduced for 50% from point E (I = 0 )t oF( I = 0.01),
the standard deviation reduced for 48% from point G (I = 0)
to H (I = 0.01). The D term brings limited beneﬁt to system
performance. Thus, the PI controller with P = 25 and I = 0.01
is suitable for the iSoRD system.
D. Comparison With Non-Continuous Control
To further validate the advantage of the PID continuous con-
trol in the iSoRD system against the non-continuous control, the
Bang-Bang control and the V aria-speed Bang-Bang close loop
control [34] are adopted and compared in the experiments. The
Bang-Bang algorithm is described as,
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
u = 100 , when PrF >P r +PrD ;
u =0 , when Pr +PrD >P rF >P r −PrD ;
u = −100, when PrF <P r −PrD,
where u is motor rotation rate, Pr is the pneumatic pressure,
PrF is the feedback pressure, PrD is the pressure of dead-zone.
And the V aria-speed close loop control is described as,
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
u = 100 , when PrF >P r +PrD,P ′rF >P ′r +PrD ;
u =7 0 , whenPrF >P r +PrD,P rF ≤P′r +PrD ;
u =0 , when Pr +PrD >P rF >P r −PrD ;
u = −70, whenPrF <P r −PrD,P rF ≥P′r +PrD ;
u = −100, when PrF <P r −PrD,P rF <P ′r +PrD,
where P′r and P′rF are the differentiation of Pr and PrF ,
respectively.
The PID control and Bang-Bang with dead-zone pressurePrD
are tested on the iSoRD system to study the effect on the step
signal tracking. We found in previous work [32] that lowering
PrD increases the oscillation of the soft robots’ motions when
controlled by Bang-Bang, due to the compressible nature of
the gas and the compliance of the actuators and the structure.
In addition, the pneumatic pressure sensor with accuracy of 1
kPa are used. Considering the sensor precision and oscillation
reduction, we set PrD = 1 kPa, which result in a mean absolute
e r r o ro f0 . 8 9k P aa ss h o w ni nF i g .4(d). When applying PID
control on the iSoRD system, the step response is smoothened
with less visible oscillation as shown in Fig. 4(e). The mean
absolute error is 0.32 kPa, which is a 64% drop compared to the
Bang-Bang control.
The sinusoidal signals with different periods are tested to
verify the effectiveness of the continuous control. The variation
range of the period is 2–16 s. The amplitude of the signal is
20 kPa with median of 100 kPa. The experiment setup is shown
as Fig. 5(a) with a single port of the iSoRD and the two-pump
system connecting to a soft bellow actuator in each system.
The inﬂuence on the mean error of the pressure and standard
deviation are recorded and plotted in Fig. 5(b). The results
show that the continuous control on the iSoRD system has
better tracking effect and less ﬂuctuation under all sinusoidal
signals. With the same Bang-Bang control, the iSoRD system
improve the performance, namely, there is a 37.5% drop in error
in comparison to the two-pump system. When the period is
shortened, the PID control performs stably with smaller error
and standard derivation than Bang-Bang.
The performance of different control methods on the iSoRD
system is further studied with T = 10 s. The result in Fig. 5(c)
shows that Bang-Bang control can follow the trajectory, but with
obvious oscillation around target pressure. The mean absolute
deviation is about 0.81 kPa, and the standard deviation is 0.57
kPa. There is obvious static difference of tracking performance
when V aria-speed Bang-Bang control is implemented, and the
ﬂuctuation value raises substantially as shown in Fig.5(d), while
the PID controller effectively constrains the ﬂuctuation of pres-
sure as shown in Fig. 4(a). When comparing with Bang-Bang
control, the PID control obtains a 58.2% drop in error, a 44.1%
drop in variance and a 78.6% drop in number of ﬂuctuations.
Comparing with V aria-speed Bang-Bang, PID controller reduces
the error by 91.6%, and reduces the variance by 72.8%. The
results are shown in Fig. 5(e) and (f).
E. Flow Rate Controllability
In order to measure the airﬂow output of the system, the
experiment shown in Fig. 6(a) is established. The iSoRD system
is connected to a pressure regulator and a syringe. By setting a
push-rod into the syringe and adding weights on top of it, the
airﬂow output of the system with loads can be measured, while
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2404 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
Fig. 5. Comparison with non-continuous control in Sine signal tracking. (a) Experiment setup. (b) Performance with different systems and controlle rs. (c)
Performance of Bang-Bang control with iSoRD system. (d) Performance of V aria-speed Bang-Bang control with iSoRD system. (e) Absolute error distrib ution
and (f) accumulated valve switching times and standard deviation of absolute error.
Fig. 6. (a) Experiment set up of airﬂow provided by the iSoRD system. (b)
Output ﬂow rate of the iSoRD system related to voltage of the pump and loads.
(c) Experiment set up of airﬂow controllability. (d) Performance of airﬂow
controllability. PWM 100-100 ms, 0-200 ms stands for the control mode which
cycles between inﬂation with the duty cycle of 100% for 100 ms and the duty
cycle of 0 (pause) for 200 ms.
the performance without the push-rod or load is recorded as
comparison. Fig. 6(b) shows the relationship between ﬂow rate
and pump voltage. The operational voltage range of the pump,
from 0 to 12 V , linearly corresponds to the PWM duty cycle,
ranging from 0 to 100%. Without a proportional valve, the pump
in the iSoRD system can operate at a minimum duty cycle of
30%, resulting in a small airﬂow of 2.8 ml/s. When the pump
operates at 100% duty cycle, it achieves the maximum airﬂow
of 15 ml/s.
As shown in Fig. 6(c), the iSoRD system is connected to the
lightweight small soft origami actuator (SOA, 8 ml) [19] to vali-
date the controllability of the output airﬂow. The iSoRD system
operates in the open-loop control modes, cycling between duty
cycles of 100% (inﬂation) and 0% (pause). 4 control modes
regulate the elongation speed of the SOA and the displacement
is measured by a laser sensor, as shown in Fig. 6(d). The SOA
elongates continuously with a 100% duty cycle, while in other
modes, the elongation of the SOA exhibits a stepwise trend
with a consistent step height respective to the inﬂation ﬂow
rate. This indicates that the iSoRD system produces a stable
and controllable air volume by the use of the motor duty cycles.
The state-of-the-art pneumatic actuation systems for soft
robotics are compared in Table I, where the iSoRD system is
able to continuously regulate the ﬂow using the pump motor
without additional components, consists of only one pump and
one solenoid valve in each pneumatic branch, provides positive
and negative pressure states, continuous ﬂow rate regulation and
stable output of low ﬂow rate.
IV . APPLICA TIONS ON PNEUMA TICDEVICES
A. Soft Wearable Devices
In order to achieve the portability and enable versatile wearing
on human body, the components of the pneumatic system need to
be ﬂexibly arranged to form a ﬂat and narrow proﬁle conforming
to human body. Thus, the prototype of the system is designed
in the form of a soft strap. Since the dimensions of body parts
vary, such as arm, wrist, shank, thigh, and etc., the positions of
components need to be adjustable to cater to different operating
conditions. The hook and loop fasteners were used to ﬁx the
components for the easy assembly and adjustability as shown
in Fig. 7(a). An elastic strap with hook surface is used to
wrap around the upper surfaces of the components to restrict
movements and ensure stability. In this way, it is easy for the
user to wear and fasten the actuation strap on the desired part of
the body as shown in Fig. 7(b), (c) and (d).
The iSoRD system of 4 independent modules is then used to
drive a series of soft devices to verify practicality, including the
rehabilitation glove, supernumerary limbs [19] and rehabilita-
tion wrist embrace [5] as shown in Fig. 7(e)–(h). The devices
are worn on the user and driven by the iSoRD system to move ac-
cording to the predetermined functions. The rehabilitation glove
straightens the index ﬁnger to 179° and bends to 148° within 10
seconds as shown in Fig. 7(e), and this ﬁnger is actuated by
only a single iSoRD. The wrist rehabilitation brace (actuated by
two iSoRDs) turns the wrist left and right and reaches about 20°
within 7.5 seconds in each direction as shown in Fig. 7(f).T h e
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LIU et al.: SINGLE PUMP-V AL VE PNEUMA TIC ACTUA TION WITH CONTINUOUS FLOW RA TE CONTROL FOR SOFT ROBOTS 2405
Fig. 7. iSoRD system application on soft robotic wearable devices and gripper.
(a) The design that is soft, ﬂat and adjustable, which can be worn on (b) wrist,
(c) shank and (d) waist. (e) The rehabilitation gloves. (f) The wrist rehabilitation
embrace. (g) The side view and (h) front view of supernumerary limbs. (i) A
small gripper is driven by the iSoRD. (j) The slow and fast gripping are compared
with the ﬂow rate control of iSoRD. (k) The gripper can grasp a foam cube under
slow gripping mode and successfully grip a weight of 200 g under both modes.
supernumerary limbs move in two directions and are actuated by
two iSoRDs. The limb bends forward 26° and back 29° within
14 seconds on the side view as shown in Fig. 7(g). On the front
view the left limb bends to 83° and straightens to 129°, and the
right limb wraps outside of the left limb to 104° and straightens
to 139° within 10 seconds as shown in Fig. 7(h). These devices
perform the desired movements under the actuation of iSoRD
system, proving the practicality in driving soft robotic wearable
devices.
B. Small-Scale Pneumatic Gripper
An iSoRD module is further used to actuate the small-scale
pneumatic gripper with the chamber volume of 22 ml (11 ml each
actuator) as shown in Fig. 7(i)–(k). The system operates in two
modes: fast gripping and slow gripping. Fast gripping employs
open-loop control with a duty cycle of 100% of the motor. Slow
gripping adopts a control which cycles between a 50 ms inﬂation
with a duty cycle of 100% and a 300 ms pause with a duty cycle of
0. The opening and closing of the small-scale pneumatic gripper
are shown in Fig. 7(i). In fast gripping mode (see Fig. 7(j)),
the small-scale gripper completes the opening action within 2
seconds when the iSoRD system provides a high ﬂow rate. In
slow gripping mode, the pressure in the small gripper exhibits
a stepwise pattern, resulting in minimal motion feed, making it
suitable for grasping fragile objects. As shown in Fig. 7(k),t h e
gripper can grasp a foam cube under slow gripping mode when
the deformation of the foam is minimal. Under both gripping
modes, the small-scale gripper can successfully grip a weight
Fig. 8. iSoRD system actuates (a) the artiﬁcial pollination device. (b) The
distance and quantity of ejected pollen are controlled by the iSoRD. (c) The
pollination experiment on ﬂowers of different sizes.
of 200 g. The tests demonstrate the iSoRD system is capable
of providing ﬁne control for minute movements and delivering
sufﬁcient force when required.
C. Flower Pollination
An artiﬁcial pollination device with the needle volume of 0.33
ml (diameter 1.85 mm, length 121 mm), is loaded with pollen
and connected with one iSoRD module is shown in Fig. 8(a).
The ejection distance of the pollen is measured with a ruler and
recorded by videos. The ejection distance and quantity of the
pollen are controlled by adjusting the duty cycle of the motor
and ejection time t. With duty cycles of 40%, 53%, and 84%, the
maximum ejection distances are 3.5 mm, 14.2 mm, and 27.2 mm,
respectively, as shown in Fig. 8(b). The pollination experiments
are further conducted on the artiﬁcial ﬂowers of different sizes
a ss h o w ni nF i g .8(c), where the ejected pollens successfully
cover the pistils with concentrated and purposeful pollination
effect, showing the application potential of the iSoRD system
for scenarios in need of delicate control of airﬂow.
V. C ONCLUSION
The iSoRD pneumatic actuation system consists of identical
modules is proposed, obtaining ﬂow rate control in positive
and negative pressure output ( −53∼83 kPa) in each module
using one-pump-one-valve (4-way/2-position solenoid) design
and PID control. With the check valves installed, pressure
holding and ﬂow independence are achieved in each pneumatic
branch. With ﬂow rate capability (2.8∼15 ml/s), heat generation
(37.7 °C) and power consumption (2.95 W per-channel) inves-
tigated by experiments, the usability is veriﬁed.
The continuous ﬂow rate regulation is achieved using the PID
controller on the pump motor of the iSoRD. When compared
to the non-continuous Bang-Bang control, the PID controller
obtains 64% drop in mean absolute error in the step signal
tracking; constrains the ﬂuctuation of pressure with 58.2% drop
in error, 44.1% drop in variance and 78.6% drop in number
of ﬂuctuations in the Sine signal tracking. Comparing with the
non-continuous V aria-speed Bang-Bang, the controller reduces
the error by 91.6%, and reduces the variance by 72.8%.
When tracking the Sine signal with the same Bang-Bang
control, the iSoRD reduces the error by 37.5% in comparison to
the two-pump system, proving the advantage of the simple pneu-
matic design. Comparing with the state-of-the-art pneumatic
actuation systems for soft robots, the simple-structured modular
system is capable of ﬁne ﬂow rate regulation in both negative
and positive pressure range with low power consumption.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2406 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 3, MARCH 2025
The portability and versatility of the system are shown in
the 4-module system that is integrated into a ﬂat and low-proﬁle
adjustable soft strip. The practicality of the system is validated by
driving three soft wearable robots to output desired movements.
The applications of driving a small-scale pneumatic gripper and
a pollination device show the adaptivity of this system due to
the range, the continuous and ﬁne control of ﬂow rate. The
simplicity, portability, versatility, practicality and the continu-
ous regulation of ﬂow of the iSoRD system will beneﬁt the
pneumatic soft robotic systems with wider application potential.
Future work includes further investigations on the accuracy,
controllable range and applications of this system.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Li et al., “Self-powered soft robot in the Mariana Trench,” Nature,
vol. 591, no. 7848, pp. 66–71, 2021.
[2] K. C. Galloway et al., “Soft robotic grippers for biological sampling on
deep reefs,” Soft Robot., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 23–33, 2016.
[3] Z. Shen et al., “Soft origami optical-sensing actuator for underwater
manipulation,” Front. Robot. AI, vol. 7, 2021, Art. no. 616128.
[4] P . Polygerinos, Z. Wang, K. C. Galloway, R. J. Wood, and C. J. Walsh,
“Soft robotic glove for combined assistance and at-home rehabilitation,”
Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 73, pp. 135–143, 2015.
[5] S. Liu et al., “A compact soft robotic wrist brace with origami actuators,”
Front. Robot. AI, vol. 8, 2021, Art. no. 614623.
[6] T. Proietti et al., “Sensing and control of a multi-joint soft wearable robot
for upper-limb assistance and rehabilitation,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2381–2388, Apr. 2021.
[7] Z. Wang, S. Liu, J. Peng, and M. Z. Chen, “The next-generation surgical
robots,” Surg. Robot., pp. 3–20, Jan. 2018.
[8] G. Fang et al., “Soft robotic manipulator for intraoperative MRI-
guided transoral laser microsurgery,” Sci. Robot. , vol. 6, no. 57, 2021,
Art. no. eabg5575.
[9] J. Lai, K. Huang, B. Lu, Q. Zhao, and H. K. Chu, “V erticalized-tip trajec-
tory tracking of a 3D-printable soft continuum robot: Enabling surgical
blood suction automation,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 27, no. 3,
pp. 1545–1556, Jun. 2022.
[10] S. Abondance, C. B. Teeple, and R. J. Wood, “A dexterous soft robotic hand
for delicate in-hand manipulation,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett. ,v o l .5 ,
no. 4, pp. 5502–5509, Oct. 2020.
[11] W. Zhu et al., “A soft-rigid hybrid gripper with lateral compliance and
dexterous in-hand manipulation,”IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 104–115, Feb. 2023.
[12] J. Zhou, J. Yi, X. Chen, Z. Liu, and Z. Wang, “BCL-13: A 13-DOF soft
robotic hand for dexterous grasping and in-hand manipulation,” IEEE
Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 3379–3386, Oct. 2018.
[13] R. Kang, Y . Guo, L. Chen, D. T. Branson, and J. S. Dai, “Design of
a pneumatic muscle based continuum robot with embedded tendons,”
IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 751–761, Apr. 2017.
[14] J. Shintake, V . Cacucciolo, D. Floreano, and H. Shea, “Soft robotic
grippers,” Adv. Mater ., vol. 30, no. 29, 2018, Art. no. 1707035.
[15] S. Y ang et al., “Dynamic capture using a traplike soft gripper with
stiffness anisotropy,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. , vol. 28, no. 3,
pp. 1337–1346, Jun. 2023.
[16] A. Ghafoor, J. S. Dai, and J. Duffy, “Stiffness modeling of the soft-ﬁnger
contact in robotic grasping,” J. Mech. Des., vol. 126, no. 4, pp. 646–656,
2004.
[17] Y . M. Zhou, C. Hohimer, T. Proietti, C. T. O’Neill, and C. J. Walsh,
“Kinematics-based control of an inﬂatable soft wearable robot for assisting
the shoulder of industrial workers,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett. ,v o l .6 ,
no. 2, pp. 2155–2162, Apr. 2021.
[18] P . Polygerinos et al., “Towards a soft pneumatic glove for hand re-
habilitation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2013,
pp. 1512–1517.
[19] S. Liu et al., “Otariidae-inspired soft-robotic supernumerary ﬂippers by
fabric kirigami and origami,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. , vol. 26,
no. 5, pp. 2747–2757, Oct. 2021.
[20] P . H. Nguyen, C. Sparks, S. G. Nuthi, N. M. V ale, and P . Polygeri-
nos, “Soft poly-limbs: Toward a new paradigm of mobile manipu-
lation for daily living tasks,” Soft Robot. , vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 38–53,
2019.
[21] A. D. Marchese, K. Komorowski, C. D. Onal, and D. Rus, “Design
and control of a soft and continuously deformable 2D robotic ma-
nipulation system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat. , 2014,
pp. 2189–2196.
[22] S. Sridar, S. Poddar, Y . Tong, P . Polygerinos, and W. Zhang, “Towards
untethered soft pneumatic exosuits using low-volume inﬂatable actuator
composites and a portable pneumatic source,”IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 4062–4069, Jul. 2020.
[23] D. P . Holland et al., “The soft robotics toolkit: Strategies for overcoming
obstacles to the wide dissemination of soft-robotic hardware,”IEEE Robot.
Automat. Mag., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 57–64, Mar. 2017.
[24] P . Abbasi, M. A. Nekoui, M. Zareinejad, P . Abbasi, and Z. Azhang,
“Position and force control of a soft pneumatic actuator,” Soft Robot. ,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 550–563, 2020.
[25] M. Hofer and R. D’Andrea, “Design, modeling and control of a soft
robotic arm,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2018,
pp. 1456–1463.
[26] B. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Ma, Y . Wu, X. Zhang, and H. Liao, “Pneumatic
system capable of supplying programmable pressure states for soft robots,”
Soft Robot., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1001–1013, 2022.
[27] S. Konishi and H. Kosawa, “High-output bending motion of a soft inﬂatable
microactuator with an actuation conversion mechanism,” Sci. Reports ,
vol. 10, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 12038.
[28] M. A. Aizen and L. D. Harder, “Expanding the limits of the pollen-
limitation concept: Effects of pollen quantity and quality,”Ecology, vol. 88,
no. 2, pp. 271–281, Feb. 2007.
[29] K. Li, Y . Huo, Y . Liu, Y . Shi, Z. He, and Y . Cui, “Design of a lightweight
robotic arm for Kiwifruit pollination,” Comput. Electron. Agriculture ,
vol. 198, 2022, Art. no. 107114.
[30] P . Pandey, J. J. Acosta, K. G. Payn, and S. N. Y oung, “Towards aerial
robotic pollination for controlled crosses in Pinus taeda,” in Proc. ASABE
Annu. Int. Meeting, 2022, pp. 1–9.
[31] R. C. Panda, Introduction to PID Controllers: Theory, Tuning and Appli-
cation to Frontier Areas. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2012.
[32] Z. Fang et al., “Omnidirectional compliance on cross-linked actuator co-
ordination enables simultaneous multi-functions of soft modular robots,”
Sci. Reports, vol. 13, 2023, Art. no. 12116.
[33] V . V . Patel, “Ziegler-Nichols tuning method,” Resonance, vol. 25, no. 10,
pp. 1385–1397, 2020, doi: 10.1007/s12045-020-1058-z.
[34] C. Della Santina, C. Duriez, and D. Rus, “Model-based control of soft
robots: A survey of the state of the art and open challenges,” IEEE Control
Syst. Mag., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 30–65, Jun. 2023.
[35] T. Proietti et al., “Restoring arm function with a soft robotic wearable for
individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 15,
no. 681, 2023, Art. no. eadd1504.
[36] A. Shtarbanov, “FlowIO development platform–The pneumatic ‘Rasp-
berry Pi’ for soft robotics,” in Proc. Extended Abstr . CHI Conf. Hum.
Factors Comput. Syst., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[37] Y . Tian, R. Su, X. Wang, N. B. Altin, G. Fang, and C. C. L. Wang,
“OpenPneu: Compact platform for pneumatic actuation with multi-
channels,” in Proc. IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron. , 2023,
pp. 765–770.
[38] M. Ahlquist, R. Jitosho, J. Bao, and A. M. Okamura, “phloSAR: A
portable, high-ﬂow pressure supply and regulator enabling untethered
operation of large pneumatic soft robots,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf.
Soft Robot., 2024, pp. 28–33.
[39] J. Lai et al., “A novel soft glove utilizing honeycomb pneumatic actuators
(HPAs) for assisting activities of daily living,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 31, pp. 3223–3233, 2023.
[40] J. Qi et al., “HaptGlove—Untethered pneumatic glove for multimode
haptic feedback in reality–virtuality continuum,” Adv. Sci., vol. 10, no. 25,
2023, Art. no. 301044.
[41] B. P . Banyarani, T. Bahram, and H. Alireza, “Design and fabrication of a
soft wearable robot using a novel pleated fabric pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle
(pfPAM) to assist walking,” Sensors Actuators A, Phys. , vol. 370, 2024,
Art. no. 115278.
[42] S. Wu et al., “High-performance hydraulic soft robotic control using
continuous ﬂow regulation and partial feedback,” IEEE Robot. Automat.
Lett., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 6967–6974, Aug. 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 