Soft Haptic Display Toolkit: A Low-Cost, Open-Source Approach to
High Resolution Tactile Feedback
Pijuan Yu, Alexis Urquhart, Anzu Kawazoe, Thomas K. Ferris, M. Cynthia Hipwell, Rebecca F. Friesen
Abstract— High-spatial-resolution wearable tactile arrays
have drawn interest from both industry and research, thanks
to their capacity for delivering detailed tactile sensations.
However, investigations of human tactile perception with high-
resolution tactile displays remain limited, primarily due to the
high costs of multi-channel control systems and the complex
fabrication required for fingertip-sized actuators. In this work,
we introduce the Soft Haptic Display (SHD) toolkit, designed to
enable students and researchers from diverse technical back-
grounds to explore high-density tactile feedback in extended
reality (XR), robotic teleoperation, braille displays, navigation
aid, MR-compatible somatosensory stimulation, and remote
palpation. The toolkit provides a rapid prototyping approach
and real-time wireless control for a low-cost, 4×4 soft wearable
fingertip tactile display with a spatial resolution of 4 mm.
We characterized the display’s performance with a maximum
vertical displacement of 1.8 mm, a rise time of 0.25 second,
and a maximum refresh rate of 8 Hz. All materials and code
are open-sourced to foster broader human tactile perception
research of high-resolution haptic displays.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The concept of the “metaverse,” first proposed in 1992, has
recently regained popularity and has led to the development
of various creative wearable haptic actuators and devices for
actively interacting with virtual environments [1], including
vibrotactile feedback for virtual textures [2] and multiple
degrees of freedom (DOFs) force feedback driven by par-
allel rigid kinematics [3]. Among these different techniques,
soft haptic actuators present advantages and potential for
wearable haptics because of their high spatial resolution,
wearability, and safety [4], [5], [6].
Many high-resolution soft fingertip displays are driven by
electroosmotic [7], electrohydraulic [8], chemical reaction-
based [9], or micro-pump actuation methods [10], [11],
[12]. Among these, pneumatic actuators—which generate
tactile sensations through fluid pressure—are particularly
popular in both the haptics and soft robotics communities
due to their relative ease of fabrication, scalability, and
controllability. While several soft robotics toolkits have been
developed to simplify pneumatic control systems [13], [14],
[15], research on high-resolution pneumatic fingertip displays
remains limited, primarily due to high costs or complex
actuator fabrication processes [5], [10], [11].
For instance, the commercial HaptX G1 glove integrates
up to 135 microfluidic actuators across the fingers and palm
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
Grant 2326453. Pijuan Yu, Alexis Urquhart, Anzu Kawazoe, M. Cynthia
Hipwell, and Rebecca F. Friesen are with Mechanical Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas. Email: pijuanyu@tamu.edu
Thomas K. Ferris is with Department of Industrial & Systems Engineer-
ing, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.
Control Box
4x4 Tactile Array
Fig. 1. Overview of Soft Haptic Display (SHD) System. The 4 × 4 tactile
array haptic display (22 x 22 x 7 mm, red) is connected to the control box
(white) via transparent air tubes (one meter). The control box communicates
with the laptop wirelessly using a socket communication method.
[12], but its Mobile Airpack Edition is priced at $38,990 [16],
making it inaccessible to many researchers. While recent
studies propose lower-cost alternatives, they often impose
stringent fabrication requirements, such as laser cutting [7],
[8] or plasma bonding [8], [10], creating a significant barrier
to entry for students and researchers interested in high-
resolution tactile feedback.
To address these limitations, we introduce the Soft Haptic
Display (SHD) toolkit. Building on principles from existing
soft robotics toolkits, the SHD is accessible to students
and researchers with diverse technical backgrounds, enabling
them to create custom high-resolution tactile arrays worn
on the fingertip to provide high-density force feedback. The
contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• Design details of a fingertip-sized 4 × 4 soft wearable
tactile array.
• A desktop-sized, lightweight (1.832 Kg) control box
that provides real-time control of the tactile array.
• Proportional pressure regulation, 16 binary pressure
outputs, and 8 pressure sensor inputs.
• 0.25 seconds actuator rise time, achieving 1.80 mm
maximum vertical displacement with up to 8 Hz refresh
frequency.
• A user-friendly graphical interface for wireless, inde-
pendent control of the tactile display with low latency.
In addition to creating immersive interactions in virtual
environments [1], this system supports robotic teleoperation
2025 22nd International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR)
June 30 - July 2, 2025, College Station, Texas, USA
979-8-3315-2441-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE 59
2025 22nd International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR) | 979-8-3315-2441-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/UR65550.2025.11078133
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[17], refreshable Braille displays [18], [19], brain-activity
mapping via somatosensory stimulation in MRI settings [20],
spatial orientation and navigation [21], remote palpation [22],
and various psychophysical studies. Our goal is to advance
high-resolution haptic display research by offering a low-
cost, rapidly developed wearable tactile array, and we have
open-sourced all project resources at the repository below 1.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First,
we describe the state of the art in open-source soft actuator
systems, as well as high-resolution tactile array research.
Then, we outline the fabrication process for the custom
tactile array. Next, we detail the control platform, including
hardware components, the low-level controller, and the user
interface. Finally, we present the device characterization
results—displacement, pressure, response time, and refresh
frequency—to evaluate the system’s performance.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Open Source Soft Robotics Systems
Soft robotics is a rapidly growing field of research due
to its adaptability, flexibility, and safety for human-robot
interaction and haptics applications. A popular resource for
new researchers and students to learn soft robotic design
is the Soft Robotics Toolkit (SRT) [13]. As an open-access
website, it provides detailed documentation of the design
process for soft pneumatic actuators and a pneumatic control
board for low-level control. Another option is the FlowIO
miniature modular platform, which aims to guide students
and researchers in actuating and sensing soft wearable robots
through its five pneumatic ports and various modular com-
ponents [14]. Other open-source websites related to soft
robotics include Programmable Air [23], PneuSoRD [24],
Pneumatic Controller [25], and Pneuduino [26]. These pneu-
matic systems aim to achieve pressure regulation through
closed-loop feedback control using pressure sensors and
valves. However, when actuating 2 mm bubbles in a fingertip-
sized wearable tactile array, controlling airflow by frequently
switching binary valves with a Pulse Width Modulation
(PWM) signal causes vibrations due to pressure fluctua-
tions [27]. While replacing binary valves with proportional
solenoid valves may reduce vibration, the size and cost of
proportional valves are significantly higher, making them less
suitable for high-resolution tactile arrays.
Instead of developing a custom regulator, an alternative
approach is to directly control a commercial analog pressure
regulator. For instance, the Soft Robotics Control-Unit [15] is
an open-source platform that uses piezo pressure regulators
to teleoperate a soft gripper, actuate a soft Pneumatic Unit
Cell (PUC) for vibrotactile and force feedback in virtual
reality (VR) [28], and control a large area haptic display
with four groups of PUCs [29]. Similarly, Meta Reality Lab
proposed a multichannel pneumatic system with approxi-
mately 15 identical pressure regulators to control a pneumatic
wristband [30]. While the size and performance of these
commercial pressure regulators are significantly better than
1github.com/pijuanyu2022/Soft-Haptic-Display-Toolkit
custom pressure regulators, they cost around $700 each,
which is unaffordable for high-resolution tactile displays.
B. Fabrication Methods of Advanced Tactile Array
Rigid actuator technologies—such as shape-memory-alloy
(SMA) springs [19], [31] and motorized sliders [32],
[33]—are popular for high-resolution tactile arrays because
they are inexpensive and easy to manufacture. However, their
intrinsic rigidity limits conformability, slows response times,
and lacks the biomimetic softness required for wearable
haptics and safe human–robot interaction.
Soft pneumatic and hydraulic actuators address these
shortcomings by emulating biological tissue mechanics, but
they typically require sophisticated fabrication tools. For
example, Wu et al. presented a 2 × 3 pneumatic array,
which utilized a UV lithography machine for mold creation
and a Parylene deposition system for coating [34]. Shen et
al. developed a 32-bubble fingertip actuator driven by the
electroosmotic method, with components precisely cut using
an ultraviolet laser cutter (LPKF U4) and a CO2 laser cutter
(ULS VLS 4.60) [7]. Meta Reality Lab introduced a high-
resolution electrohydraulic haptic interface comprising 16
individually controlled bubble actuators [8]. Their fabrication
process involved laser cutting a thermoplastic dielectric film
with 8 holes and using a plasma bonding machine to bond a
thin silicone sheet to one side of the dielectric film. Shan et
al. developed a microfluidic 5 × 5 tactile array, employing a
vacuum oven to degas and cure PDMS (RTV615) solution
and a plasma cleaner to enhance bonding between layers
[10]. Wang et al. [11] demonstrated a 4 × 4 pneumatic
array fabricated by bonding two layers of thermoplastic
polyurethane (TPU) films using a hot press machine and
custom aluminum alloy stamps.
While the aforementioned studies leveraged advanced
manufacturing methods to fabricate tactile arrays and achieve
higher performance, the reliance on expensive and complex
fabrication tools poses significant barriers for students and
researchers from diverse backgrounds who aim to rapidly
develop high-resolution tactile arrays.
III. M ATERIAL AND METHODS
The SHD system architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2 and
includes three data flows: control signals (green), power
supply (red), and airflow (blue). Overall, the air pressure
is generated by the micro pump, regulated by the pressure
regulator, distributed into 16 channels via mini solenoid
valves, and then directed to the silicone tactile array to
inflate the bubbles. The host PC communicates with the
Raspberry Pi and Arduino Uno to adjust the system pressure
and control the valves for the high-resolution display. Details
are described in the following subsections.
A. Tactile Array Design
The 4 × 4 tactile array consists of 16 hollow, bottomless
cylindrical channels arranged within a 22 mm square grid.
It is composed of two layers (Fig. 3): 4 mm of Dragon Skin
10 Medium and 3 mm of EcoFlex 00-10. Dragon Skin was
60
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Raspberry Pi 5Run_robot.py
Arduino Uno
12V 5A Power
VEAB board
Regulator
SoftRobo.py
Pneumatic.inoRemote PCGUI.py
main.pytactile_array.py
16 x Valves4 x Protoboards
Micro Pump
4.5 V Batteries
SignalPowerAir flow
SocketSerialI2CADCDACGPIODigital PinsI2C5 V24 V6 V
Fig. 2. System architecture. The entire system, except for the host PC, is housed within the control box. Users can operate the graphical user interface
(GUI) on the host PC to wirelessly control one pressure regulator and 16 solenoid valves for pattern display on the 4 × 4 tactile array.
air
tube
dragon-skin
2mm
1mm 2mm
4mm
3mm2mm
0.5mm
3mm
sil-poxy
eco-/f_lex
Fig. 3. Cross section diagram of silicone array .
selected to prevent bubbling on the sides, as its thickness
provides greater structural support. EcoFlex was chosen for
its low tensile strength and high elasticity, allowing for
temporary deformation at the top. To reinforce the center,
which experiences the highest stress, the tops gradually
increase in thickness from 0.5 mm at the edges to 1 mm
in the middle, resulting in a 0.5 mm difference in thickness.
The arrays were molded in two parts (Fig. 4A): the
lower layer and the upper layer. The molds were produced
using Prusa’s MK3S+ FDM (Fused Deposition Modeling)
printers with PLA (Polylactic Acid). They were designed
to be modular to prevent tearing during demolding (see
Fig. 4B). Before molding, the molds were prepped with
silicone release spray. The lower layer was molded first:
Dragon Skin 10 Medium was hand-mixed for three minutes
to ensure thorough blending. It was then degassed in a
vacuum chamber at -68 kPa (gauge) for five minutes. Once
bubbling ceased, the solution was removed from the vacuum
chamber and slowly and evenly poured into the mold. The
mold was then placed back into the vacuum chamber at 20
(a) (b)
Fig. 4. Tactile Array Fabrication. (A) Split pegs create holes in the
silicone for the air tubes to be inserted; (B) Exploded view.
inHg for three minutes to remove any remaining air bubbles.
The lids, connected to the holder through pegs, were placed
on top to create an even surface. The molds were left to cure
at room temperature for five hours.
Once cured, the lower layer was removed from the mold
and placed at the bottom of the upper mold. The EcoFlex 00-
10 was prepared using the same steps as the Dragon Skin 10
Medium and was poured directly on top of the lower layer.
This layer was left to cure for four hours. Once the final array
was removed from the mold, 2 mm OD (outer diameter)
plastic tubing, cut to 35 mm in length, was added. SilPoxy
was applied in a thick layer to the bottom of each plastic
tube, ensuring none covered the tubing hole. Each tube was
then inserted fully into its respective hole and subsequently
pulled up by 2 mm from the bottom of the tactile array. The
61
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Raspberry Pi 5Arduino UnoTIP 120 transistorsPressure sensors (5V)Solenoid Valves (6V)Pressure regulator (24V)Mini air pump (4.5 V)Top enclosure12V power supplyI2C MultiplexerVEAB board12V to 6V converter12V to 5V converterSide enclosureSide enclosure
Fig. 5. SHD Controller Box Details. The control box measures 20 cm
in length, 15 cm in width and 15 cm in height. All enclosure components
and board holders are 3D-printed using PLA material.
SilPoxy was allowed to cure for 30 minutes before use.
B. Hardware system
The SHD hardware system is organized into three func-
tional layers within a controller box, with an additional rear
module dedicated to power and air supply (see Fig. 5). The
bottom layer houses a Raspberry Pi 5 (8 GB RAM) mini-
computer, an Arduino Uno Rev3 micro-controller, an I2C
multiplexer (PCA9548A, Adafruit), a VEAB board, and two
DC voltage converters. The Raspberry Pi 5 serves as the
central controller, enabling wireless communication with a
host PC, serial communication with the Arduino Uno, and
direct control of the pressure regulator via the VEAB board.
The Arduino Uno is connected to the I2C multiplexer to
support up to eight I2C channels.
The VEAB board is connected to a proportional piezo
regulator (VEAB-L-26-D13-Q4-V1-1R1, Festo) capable of
providing 0–0.1 MPa of output pressure in response to a
0–10 V input. An mini air pump (4699, Adafruit) supplies
air at a maximum pressure of 55 kPa and a flow rate of
up to 2.5 liters per minute. The VEAB board incorporates
two digital-to-analog converters (MCP4725, MicroChip) to
deliver control signals and two analog-to-digital converters
(ADS1014, Texas Instruments) to receive feedback from the
regulator. Further details of the VEAB board can be found
in the Soft Robotics Control-Unit [15].
The middle layer of the controller box contains four
custom circuit boards. Each board integrates four TIP120
transistors (976, Adafruit) for switching solenoid valves
on or off, four 1N4001 flyback diodes (755, Adafruit) to
prevent reverse voltage damage, and two MPRLS pressure
sensors (3965, Adafruit) rated for 0–172 kPa. Twelve of the
transistors interface with the Arduino’s digital outputs, while
the remaining four interface with the Raspberry Pi’s GPIO
digital outputs. All eight pressure sensors communicate with
the Arduino via the I2C multiplexer for data acquisition.
The top layer includes 16 solenoid micro air valves (6V
Air Valve, Adafruit). A 12 V adjustable power supply (4880,
Adafruit) mounted at the rear of the controller box provides
the primary power input. This supply is routed through the
VEAB board to generate 24 V for the pressure regulator
(after voltage amplification), through a DC converter (12
V to 5 V USB Type-C, YIPIN HEXHA) for powering the
Raspberry Pi, and through another DC converter (12 V to 6
V Step Down Converter, DROK) for driving the 16 solenoid
valves (see Fig. 2). The Arduino Uno receives power from
the Raspberry Pi, which also indirectly supplies the eight
pressure sensors through the I2C multiplexer. Due to the
high current demand of the micro air pump, a separate 4.5
V battery box is used to power it.
C. Software architecture
The control signal flow is represented as the green line in
Fig. 2. To achieve wireless control, the host PC first utilizes
the Secure Shell Protocol (SSH) to remotely log into the
Raspberry Pi and launch the Python script. The host PC then
launches Python software with a graphic interface in the local
environment and establishes a connection to the Raspberry
Pi via socket communication using the Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) network. The Raspberry
Pi and Arduino Uno communicate through a USB cable using
a serial communication method. This setup offers several
benefits: the TCP/IP network enables low-latency commu-
nication (typically 1–10 ms) and high data transfer rates,
ensuring reliable and real-time interaction. Additionally, the
USB-serial connection allows a communication frequency of
up to 115200 bps, supporting efficient data exchange between
the Raspberry Pi and Arduino.
To offer users—including students, researchers, and prac-
titioners—the flexibility to control a high-resolution tactile
array, debug the system, visualize pressure sensor data, and
preserve records for future analysis, a user-friendly graphical
user interface (GUI) was developed using the CustomTkinter
Python library. The GUI is organized into four primary
panels, each serving a distinct purpose in the configuration
and operation of the tactile system (Figure 6). The sections
below provide detailed descriptions of these panels.
1) Setting Panel: The first panel (Figure 6A), referred to
as the Setting Panel, is central to managing the system’s core
configurations. Through a concise set of controls, users can
establish a direct connection to the Raspberry Pi by entering
its IP address in a pop-up window, restore the system to
default settings, and archive both actuator commands and
pressure sensor data into CSV files that include time stamps
for traceability. Additionally, the interface appearance can be
toggled between Light and Dark modes, and its scale can be
adjusted from 80% to 120%, accommodating various monitor
sizes and user preferences.
2) Pressure Regulator Panel: The Pressure Regulator
Panel (Figure 6B) comprises three integrated sections de-
signed to fine-tune the system’s internal pressure. On the
left, a real-time plot visualizes the normalized control signal
62
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A BDC
Fig. 6. Graphical User Interface (GUI). (A) Setting panel; (B) Pressure regulator panel; (C) Display panel; (D) Sensor panel.
over time, enabling users to observe how the voltage applied
to the regulator is dynamically adjusted. In the middle sec-
tion, several waveforms—sinusoidal, square, constant, and
custom-imported waveforms—can be selected to control the
pressure inside the system. Of these, the constant waveform
is often used to maintain a uniform pressure for stable force
output across the array. The right section allows users to
modify parameters such as amplitude for sinusoidal, square,
and constant waveforms, while frequency can be tuned for
sinusoidal and square waves. Both slider-based and direct
text-entry methods are supported, ensuring precision and
flexibility in the parameter settings.
3) Display Panel: The Display Panel (Figure 6C) facil-
itates real-time feedback and provides direct valve control
for the tactile array. A log window on the left chronicles all
user inputs and system messages, streamlining troubleshoot-
ing efforts. The middle portion of this panel manages the
launching of additional windows for psychophysical or other
specialized experiments. On the right, 16 interactive toggle
buttons correspond to the array’s 16 valves, enabling users to
manually activate or deactivate individual channels to create
custom patterns. An Auto tab offers an assortment of prepro-
grammed animation sequences for demonstration purposes
and device testing. Moreover, researchers can design and add
their own animation patterns through this tab. In order to
support ease of use, a “help” command can be entered into
a dedicated text box at the bottom of the panel, and a concise
tutorial will then be displayed within the log window.
4) Sensor Panel: The final panel (Figure 6D), called the
Sensor Panel, contains eight real-time plots illustrating the
pressure sensor data over time. To facilitate monitoring, these
plots are grouped into two tabbed views, covering sensors
1–4 and sensors 5–8, respectively. By providing immediate
visual feedback on the sensor readings, the panel assists users
in diagnosing potential airflow or pressure inconsistencies
within the system. Furthermore, the panel’s modular design
can easily be extended to incorporate additional sensors,
ensuring that the GUI will scale as the hardware evolves.
IV. D EVICE CHARACTERIZATION
To understand the characteristics of the haptic device, we
conducted measurement experiments.
A. Dynamic response and delay in single bubble actuation
First, we measured the displacement of a single bubble
using a Laser Doppler Vibrometer (VibroFlex QTec, Poly-
tec, USA). Simultaneously, the input signal to the pressure
regulator and the pressure from the internally mounted pres-
sure sensor were recorded. The Laser Doppler Vibrometer
(LDV) and the input signal to the pressure regulator were
captured using a data acquisition (DAQ) device (NI USB-
6211, National Instruments, USA) at a sampling rate of
1000 Hz. The velocity data obtained from the LDV was
converted to displacement through numerical integration. The
pressure sensor readings were recorded by an Arduino at a
sampling rate of 10 Hz. Using the input signal as a reference,
we plotted the input signal to the pressure regulator, the
displacement, and the pressure of a single bubble for sine
and square wave inputs at frequencies of 0.5, 1, and 2 Hz
(Fig. 7A).
63
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 7. Input Signal and Displacement of a Single Bubble (A) Time course of the input signal to the pressure regulator (orange, voltage in V),
bubble displacement (blue, mm), and resulting pressure (green, Pa). (B) Single-bubble displacement response to a 0.5 Hz square wave input. Rise time
(τr = t2 −t1), defined as the interval between 10% ( t1) and 90% ( t2) of maximum displacement, is 0.25 s under safe operation (6.5 V input, 30 kPa
pressure, 1.8 mm displacement).
Displacement 
1.5 mm
Sine wave Square wave
0.125
0.25
0.5
1
2
4
8
16
32
(Hz)0
Time (s)
105
A0.5 mm
Displacement (mm pkpk) 
Frequency (Hz)
10-1 100 102101
Sine wave Square waveB
10-1
100
101
Fig. 8. Relationship Between Input Frequency and Displacement of a Single Bubble (A) Displacement of a single bubble at 9 different input
frequencies of sine and square waves. (B) Relationship between input frequency and bubble displacement for both sine and square wave inputs. The light
dashed line represents the curve-fitting model for the sine wave, while the pink dashed line represents the curve-fitting model for the square wave.
Next, we calculated the delay between the input signal
to the pressure regulator and the corresponding bubble dis-
placement. Figure 7B shows the alignment of one cycle of
the 0.5 Hz square wave input and its resulting displacement.
During the measurements, we recorded five cycles of the
square wave over a 10-second period, and the displacements
for all five cycles were plotted. As shown in Fig. 7B,
the displacement of the bubble across the five cycles was
consistent. To determine the delay, we measured the time
lag between the rising edges of the input voltage signal and
the corresponding displacement. The calculated rising time
was 0.25 seconds, and this value remained consistent across
all cycles of the square wave input.
Latency in the system was measured by recording times-
tamps from both the GUI and the Raspberry Pi for corre-
sponding events, specifically when the user clicked a button
and when the sensor data exceeded 1 kPa. Synchronized
via the Network Time Protocol (NTP), the time difference
between user inputs and sensor events was 164.65 ± 37.42
ms latency across 15 trials.
B. Frequency Characterization
In the second part of the measurement, we investigated
the extent to which a single bubble actuates when subjected
to different input frequencies of sine and square waves. To
achieve this, we measured the displacement of the bubble
using a laser Doppler vibrometer (LDV). The input signals
included sine and square waves at frequencies of 0.125, 0.25,
0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 Hz. Figure 8A illustrates the
displacement of a single bubble when exposed to the nine
different frequencies of sine and square waves. As expected,
maximum displacement decreased progressively between 0.5
Hz and 8 Hz as frequency increased. However, irregular
response was observed at 16 Hz and 32 Hz, likely attributable
to wireless communication latency and pressure fluctuations
induced by the 1-meter pneumatic tubing.
We calculated the peak-to-peak displacement, defined as
the difference between the initial state and the maximum
displacement for each frequency, and plotted the relationship
between input frequency and bubble displacement (Fig-
ure 8B). As shown in Figure 8B, the displacement varies
64
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I
EXISTING MICROFLUID FINGERTIP WEARABLE HIGH RESOLUTION HAPTIC DISPLAY
Tactile
Device
Actuation
Method
Array size Actuator Fabrication Method Vertical
Displacement (mm)
Spatial Resolu-
tion (mm)
Diameter
(mm)
2012 [34] Pneumatic 2 x 3 UV lithography, Parylene coating 0.56 2.50 1.40
2023 [12] Pneumatic 16 Proprietary microfluidic system (HaptX) 0.90 2.50 Unknown
2023 [7] Electroosmosis 32 Ultraviolet laser cutting, CO 2 laser cutting 1.10 2.36 1.60
2023 [8] Electrohydraulic 4 x 4 Laser cutting, Plasma bonding 2.00 3.00 1.50
2024 [11] Pneumatic 4 x 4 Hot press, Custom stamps 2.50 4.00 2.50
2024 [10] Pneumatic 5 x 5 Vacuum oven, Plasma bonding 0.21 1.25 0.75
Our work Pneumatic 4 x 4 3D printer, Vacuum chamber 1.80 4.00 3.00
across different frequencies and wave types. However, a
general trend is observed where the displacement decreases
as the input frequency increases.
V. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
A. Contributions
In this study, we present the development of the Soft
Haptic Display (SHD) toolkit, which includes the fabrication
of a soft fluidic tactile array, firmware integration, and user
interface (UI) design. The primary goal of the SHD is to
provide a rapid prototyping platform that lowers the barriers
to entry for researchers in wearable, high-resolution tactile
feedback. The total cost of this toolkit is approximately
$1,000, including a $700 pressure regulator, which remains
significantly more affordable than the HaptX glove and other
high-density arrays with comparable spatial resolution. Al-
though less-expensive devices exist (e.g., the stepper-driven
TactionTablet at $32 [33] or jamming-based displays at $400
[35]), the SHD combines fingertip-sized actuators and soft
compliance—features that are essential for applications such
as VR tactile feedback and telerobotic manipulation.
To facilitate ease of prototyping, our novel soft actuator
and control box require only a 3D printer and a vacuum
chamber for fabrication, utilizing widely available materials
such as silicone rubber and PLA filament. For wireless
control with low latency, the system integrates a Raspberry
Pi 5 and an Arduino Uno. Both platforms benefit from
large user communities that provide tutorials, troubleshooting
resources, and support for a wide range of peripherals,
accelerating development and reducing the learning curve.
Additionally, the toolkit features a modern, customizable UI
built with an open-source Python library, allowing users to
control the tactile display in real time and monitor dynamic
pressure values. The project repository includes compre-
hensive documentation, covering component procurement,
tactile array fabrication, control board soldering, system
assembly, and software installation and execution.
In terms of performance evaluation, our device charac-
terization results indicate performance comparable to other
high-resolution soft tactile devices (see Table I). The spatial
resolution—defined as the center-to-center distance between
adjacent actuator chambers—is 4 mm, with each chamber
having a 3 mm diameter, resulting in an edge-to-edge sepa-
ration of only 1 mm. In order to avoid popping the array
bubbles, we limit maximum control voltage input to the
regulator below 6.5 V , corresponding to a maximum 30 kPa
of pressure and 1.8 mm step response displacement with
a rise time of 0.25 seconds. Furthermore, the microvalves
and pump are housed within a compact 20 × 15 × 15 cm
control box, reducing reliance on bulky air supply systems
and enabling a portable, backpack-compatible design.
B. Limitations and Future work
Despite these advancements, several limitations merit at-
tention. First, while the SHD’s cost is substantially lower
than commercial systems, the $700 pneumatic regulator
remains prohibitive for independent developers or resource-
constrained settings. Future efforts will prioritize open-
source regulator designs or alternative pressure sources to
further democratize access.
Second, the pressure control system currently limits indi-
vidual actuator modulation. While each actuator unit can be
independently toggled on or off through the valve, individual
height control is difficult to achieve due to the system’s
open-loop design. Instead, all 16 actuators are modulated
simultaneously by a single pressure regulator. The primary
reason is that we utilized low-cost ON/OFF solenoid valves
to minimize costs, which limits precision.
Although we attempted to develop a bang-bang closed-
loop control using two valves and a pressure sensor, follow-
ing the approach in [36], applying this method in a low-
pressure (30 kPa) pneumatic system led to air fluctuations
and vibrations that propagate through the tubing and become
perceptible to the user. Future research should explore ad-
vanced pneumatic control techniques and conduct a force
characterization experiment to evaluate performance.
The third limitation is the lack of psychophysical exper-
iments. While we characterized the device’s performance
using the LDV and pressure sensor, human perception studies
are essential. Specifically, we plan to conduct an absolute
threshold detection experiment to determine the minimum
perceivable pressure for tactile stimulation and a pattern
discrimination experiment to evaluate the device’s ability by
rendering both static and dynamic tactile patterns.
The final limitation is that, while the toolkit provides a
custom GUI, it currently lacks demonstrations for AR/VR
applications. Additionally, the control box is still powered
by a grounded power supply, which restricts untethered
operation. Future work will focus on replacing the grounded
power supply with a battery, enabling the control box to
function as a wearable backpack. Furthermore, efforts will
be directed toward integrating the tactile display with Unity
to facilitate AR/VR-based interactions.
65
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced the Soft Haptic Display
(SHD) toolkit, which offers a rapid prototyping approach for
developing soft microfluidic tactile arrays capable of high-
resolution force feedback. By simplifying design, fabrica-
tion, and operation, the toolkit aims to lower barriers for
students and researchers in haptics, soft robotics, extended
reality, assistive technology, neuroscience, psychophysics,
and other fields exploring high-density microactuator-based
tactile feedback. The toolkit includes detailed instructions
on installation, assembly, and usage, and all resources are
available open-source. We invite interested researchers to
make use of this toolkit, thereby expanding the horizons
of human tactile perception research and advancing the
development of high-resolution haptic displays.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the US National Science
Foundation (NSF-2326453).
REFERENCES
[1] C. Pacchierotti, F. Chinello, K. Koumaditis, M. D. Luca, E. Ofek,
and O. Georgiou, “Guest editorial haptics in the metaverse: Haptic
feedback for virtual, augmented, mixed, and extended realities,” IEEE
Transactions on Haptics , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 122–128, 2024.
[2] R. F. Friesen and Y . Vardar, “Perceived realism of virtual textures
rendered by a vibrotactile wearable ring display,” IEEE Transactions
on Haptics , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 216–226, 2024.
[3] S. B. Schorr and A. M. Okamura, “Fingertip tactile devices for virtual
object manipulation and exploration,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems , 2017, pp. 3115–
3119.
[4] A. Frisoli and D. Leonardis, “Wearable haptics for virtual reality and
beyond,” Nature Reviews Electrical Engineering , pp. 1–14, 2024.
[5] M. Emami, A. Bayat, R. Tafazolli, and A. Quddus, “A survey on hap-
tics: Communication, sensing and feedback,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials , 2024.
[6] M. Zhu, S. Biswas, S. I. Dinulescu, N. Kastor, E. W. Hawkes, and
Y . Visell, “Soft, wearable robotics and haptics: Technologies, trends,
and emerging applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 110, no. 2,
pp. 246–272, 2022.
[7] V . Shen, T. Rae-Grant, J. Mullenbach, C. Harrison, and C. Shultz,
“Fluid reality: High-resolution, untethered haptic gloves using elec-
troosmotic pump arrays,” in Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 2023, pp. 1–
20.
[8] J. Hartcher-O’Brien, V . Mehta, N. Colonnese, A. Gupta, C. J. Bruns,
P. Agarwal et al., “Fingertip wearable high-resolution electrohydraulic
interface for multimodal haptics,” in 2023 IEEE World Haptics Con-
ference (WHC). IEEE, 2023, pp. 299–305.
[9] R. H. Heisser, C. A. Aubin, O. Peretz, N. Kincaid, H. S. An, E. M.
Fisher, S. Sobhani, P. Pepiot, A. D. Gat, and R. F. Shepherd, “Valveless
microliter combustion for densely packed arrays of powerful soft
actuators,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 118,
no. 39, p. e2106553118, 2021.
[10] B. Shan, C. Liu, Y . Guo, Y . Wang, W. Guo, Y . Zhang, and D. Wang,
“A multi-layer stacked microfluidic tactile display with high spatial
resolution,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics , 2024.
[11] Y . Wang, J. Liang, J. Yu, Y . Shan, X. Huang, W. Lin, Q. Pan, T. Zhang,
Z. Zhang, Y . Gao et al. , “Multiscale haptic interfaces for metaverse,”
Device, 2024.
[12] H. Inc., “HaptX Gloves G1,” https://haptx.com/gloves-g1/, 2025, ac-
cessed: 2025-02-11.
[13] D. P. Holland, E. J. Park, P. Polygerinos, G. J. Bennett, and C. J.
Walsh, “The soft robotics toolkit: Shared resources for research and
design,” Soft Robotics , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 224–230, 2014.
[14] A. Shtarbanov, “Flowio development platform–the pneumatic “rasp-
berry pi” for soft robotics,” in Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems , 2021, pp. 1–6.
[15] B. J. Caasenbrood, F. E. Van Beek, H. K. Chu, and I. A. Kuling, “A
desktop-sized platform for real-time control applications of pneumatic
soft robots,” in 2022 IEEE 5th International Conference on Soft
Robotics (RoboSoft) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 217–223.
[16] C. XR., “haptx-g1-mobile-single,” https://channelxr.com/products/haptx-
gloves-g1?variant=48733998154044, 2025, accessed: 2025-02-11.
[17] C. Pacchierotti and D. Prattichizzo, “Cutaneous/tactile haptic feedback
in robotic teleoperation: Motivation, survey, and perspectives,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics , 2023.
[18] A. Russomanno, S. O’Modhrain, R. B. Gillespie, and M. W. Rodger,
“Refreshing refreshable braille displays,” IEEE transactions on hap-
tics, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 287–297, 2015.
[19] A. S. Walker and S. Sangelkar, “Design exploration of affordable re-
freshable braille display technology for low-income visually impaired
users,” in International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , vol. 58134.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2017, p. V02BT03A012.
[20] C. Travassos, A. Sayal, B. Direito, J. Pereira, T. Sousa, and M. Castelo-
Branco, “Assessing mr-compatibility of somatosensory stimulation
devices: A systematic review on testing methodologies,” Frontiers in
Neuroscience, vol. 17, p. 1071749, 2023.
[21] L. A. Jones and N. B. Sarter, “Tactile displays: Guidance for their
design and application,” Human factors , vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 90–111,
2008.
[22] P. Yu, L. C. Batteas, T. Ferris, M. C. Hipwell, F. Quek, and R. F.
Friesen, “Investigating passive presentation paradigms to approximate
active haptic palpation,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics , 2024.
[23] Programmable-air. Accessed: 2025-02-11. [Online]. Available:
https://www.programmableair.com/
[24] T. R. Young, M. S. Xavier, Y . K. Yong, and A. J. Fleming, “A
control and drive system for pneumatic soft robots: Pneusord,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 2822–2829.
[25] Pneumatic controller. Accessed: 2025-02-11. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://hdcl.mechanical.illinois.edu/open-source-materials/exo-
test-bed/pneumatic-controller/
[26] Pneuduino. Accessed: 2025-02-11. [Online]. Available:
https://pneuduino.org/
[27] Q. Gao, J. Wang, Y . Zhu, J. Wang, and J. Wang, “Research status and
prospects of control strategies for high speed on/off valves,”Processes,
vol. 11, no. 1, p. 160, 2023.
[28] F. E. van Beek, Q. P. Bisschop, and I. A. Kuling, “Validation of a soft
pneumatic unit cell (puc) in a vr experience: a comparison between
vibrotactile and soft pneumatic haptic feedback,” IEEE Transactions
on Haptics , 2023.
[29] L. C. L. van Laake, M. Alberts, F. E. van Beek, and I. A. Kuling, “A
large area soft robotic haptic display,” in 2024 IEEE 7th International
Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 728–733.
[30] B. Stephens-Fripp, A. Israr, and C. Rognon, “A multichannel pneu-
matic analog control system for haptic displays: Multichannel pneu-
matic analog control system (mpacs),” in Extended Abstracts of the
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2021,
pp. 1–7.
[31] R. Vel ´azquez, E. Pissaloux, M. Hafez, and J. Szewczyk, “Toward
low-cost highly portable tactile displays with shape memory alloys,”
Applied Bionics and Biomechanics , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 57–70, 2007.
[32] S. Hossain, A. A. Raied, A. Rahman, Z. R. Abdullah, D. Adhikary,
A. R. Khan, A. Bhattacharjee, C. Shahnaz, and S. A. Fattah, “Text to
braille scanner with ultra low cost refreshable braille display,” in 2018
IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC) . IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–6.
[33] M. E. Vrablic, “Tactiontablet: affordable tactile graphics display,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2020.
[34] X. Wu, S.-H. Kim, H. Zhu, C.-H. Ji, and M. G. Allen, “A refreshable
braille cell based on pneumatic microbubble actuators,” Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 908–916, 2012.
[35] J. Brown and F. Bello, “Design and characterisation of particle
jamming-based variable stiffness displays using non-pneumatic actu-
ators,” in 2024 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS) . IEEE, 2024,
pp. 379–384.
[36] J. W. Booth, J. C. Case, E. L. White, D. S. Shah, and R. Kramer-
Bottiglio, “An addressable pneumatic regulator for distributed control
of soft robots,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Soft
Robotics (RoboSoft) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 25–30.
66
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:57:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 