Smart Materials and
Structures
       
TECHNICAL NOTE
Automatic enclosure system with tunable strapping
pressure for active physical interface using soft
actuated straps: a proof of concept
To cite this article: Christopher van Vlerken et al 2025 Smart Mater. Struct. 34 127001
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
You may also like
A metamaterial-enhanced pneumatic soft
actuator: design, modeling and validation
Shucheng Li, Huaze Li and Zhaobing Liu
-
A review of woven textile circuit boards:
fundamentals, development strategies,
and joining techniques
Faisal Ahmed, James Reynolds, Amanda
C Mills et al.
-
Modeling and simulating the
magnetoelectric effect of multi-coated
fibrous composites containing thin
transition layers
Jiantao Liu, Zehui Xu, Minyang Yan et al.
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 23.141.4.162 on 22/09/2026 at 02:08
Smart Materials and Structures
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 (14pp) https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -665X/ae2555
Technical Note
Automatic enclosure system with
tunable strapping pressure for active
physical interface using soft actuated
straps: a proof of concept
Christopher van Vlerken1,3,∗, Kevin Langlois 1,2, Mengnan Wu 1,3,
Bram Vanderborght1,2 and Tom Verstraten1,3
1 Robotics & Multibody Mechanics (R&MM) Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1050 Brussels,
Belgium
2 IMEC, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven 3001, Belgium
3 Flanders Make, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
E-mail: Christopher.Konstantin.V an.Vlerken@vub.be
Received 2 September 2025, revised 11 November 2025
Accepted for publication 27 November 2025
Published 9 December 2025
Abstract
Autonomous donning/doffing of physical attachments is critical for independent, efficient usage
and acceptance of wearable robots. However, existing physical attachments consist of passive
sleeves and straps that require user dexterity for donning, which limits independent usage by
impaired populations. Thus, we introduce the first automatic limb attachment system consisting
of soft actuated straps that wrap around the limb and lock using a magnet-and-hook latch. Our
novel system achieves an average donning time of 27.7 ± 1.0 s reliably over ten consecutive
cycles, accommodates different range of arm circumferences (220–294 mm), maintains closure
for clinical-level mechanical loads (up to 80 N normal and 32 N shear), and precisely controls
strapping pressure within the 15 kPa human comfort threshold over time. The system secures
the limb while consistently regulating attachment. This work provides proof-of-concept for a
practical, versatile solution towards universally applicable self-securing attachments limb for
rehabilitation, occupational, and home-based robotic exoskeletons.
Supplementary material for this article is available online
Keywords: soft actuators , smart materials, pneumatic systems, wearable devices,
strapping pressure control , physical attachments
1 . Introduction
The long-term goal for wearable robotic devices across
clinical, home-based, and occupational applications is to
∗
Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
enable user independence. Critical to self-directed use of
such devices is ease of donning and doffing without assist-
ance. However, conventional wearable robotic devices feature
physical attachments—also referred to as ‘physical interfaces’
- that require high dexterity and/or strength for donning/-
doffing. Many older adults and patients with motor impair-
ments lack these abilities, so assistance from another person
1
© 2025 IOP Publishing Ltd. All rights, including for text and
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
is frequently required for setup and removal [ 1]. Similarly,
industrial workers may also require an assistant to help don/-
doff an exoskeleton and adjust it to their size if the device
is shared between multiple users [ 2]. This dependence on
assistance for donning/doffing and sizing increases clinician,
caregiver, and technician workload, adding time and cost to
exoskeleton usage [ 3–5]. Furthermore, devices that can be
donned quickly and independently may reduce the perception
of social burden or stigma and are more likely to be adop-
ted and used consistently by patients and workers in pub-
lic settings [ 2, 6, 7]. Having a physical attachment system
that allows hands free-donning, repeatably over usages and
enabling wearer autonomy for a range of user anthropomet-
rics is therefore a critical step towards widespread adoption of
wearable robotic devices.
User acceptance of wearable devices depends heavily on
physical comfort and safety, which are primarily influenced
by the physical attachments between the device and the human
body [ 8–10]. User discomfort and tissue injury can occur
when strapping pressure exceeds safe thresholds or when the
attachment creates unstable attachment conditions [ 11]; thus,
physical attachments must strike a balance between com-
peting demands for ensuring both skin/tissue comfort and a
secure connection with the robot. Unstable attachment res-
ults from uncontrolled interaction forces at the attachment
point, which can lead to relative movement between the
device and limb. Akiyama et al found that thigh-level move-
ment during sit-to-stand tasks can reach up to 40 mm for
applied forces and moments of 10 N and 0.2 N·m, respectively,
demonstrating the potential for attachment instability [ 12].
Regarding pressure-related concerns, since soft tissue com-
pliance contrasts sharply with the high stiffness of rigid exo-
skeleton frames, designers often overtighten attachment straps
to increase attachment stability. However, this approach has
inherent limitations, as attachment pressures above approxim-
ately 15 kPa provoke discomfort and, in hyposensitive users,
can cause skin breakdown [ 13, 14]. An ideal attachment must
therefore anchor the attached limb by sustaining the right
amount of holding forces applied to the attachment and act-
ively regulate pressure within a physiologically safe and com-
fortable range while maintaining stable attachment conditions.
Recent soft-robotic cuffs have demonstrated important
advancements in attachment comfort and stiffness by dynam-
ically regulating pressure around the limb, but almost all
designs feature a closed sleeve-type architecture (figure 1,
A. Closed architecture) that hinders autonomous donning.
Inflatable sleeves such as Diteesawat et al ’s shrink-to-fit
garment [ 15] and Schäffer et al ’s textile-muscle sleeve [ 16]
adapt to different body fits during pressurization and task-
based actuation. Pressure-managed cuffs [ 17, 18] and shape-
memory-alloy inserts [ 19] also improve in-use fit and mod-
ulate strapping pressure over time. However, all of these
designs still require users to insert the arm through a con-
fined space for attachment, which poses significant challenges
for individuals with motor impairments. Indeed, fine motor
skills required for everyday tasks such as clothing-related
activities are among the main challenges for people with dis-
abilities, creating barriers to community participation and con-
tributing to environmental barriers [ 20, 21]. Moreover, few
of them have low pressure capability, which reduces pneu-
matic efficiency. Only Diteesawat et al and Langlois et al
achieved an efficient anchoring point at low pressure (25 kPa
and 13 kPa respectively), while most other systems require
significantly higher operating pressures that increase energy
consumption and reduce compatibility with portable pneu-
matic platforms. While some of these devices report a relat-
ively quick donning time—e.g. 6.8 s in [15], the reported don-
ning times may not fully capture the complete donning pro-
cess, as they primarily measure the garment’s actuation phase
rather than including the initial limb insertion step into the
sleeve. Furthermore, to facilitate morphological adaptation,
most of these pneumatic cuffs employ multiple chambers to
apply pressure at different skin sites [ 22], but the use of mul-
tiple chambers is often unreliable for pressure control since it
requires a more complex control scheme than a single cham-
ber and introduces vulnerabilities such as cross-talk between
chambers.
In contrast to closed architectures, open architecture
designs offer many advantages but are not fully autonomous
due to their mostly passive nature. Open architecture attach-
ments consist of strap-based designs where the user places the
arm on top of an open shell (figure 1, B. Opened architecture),
which is much easier than navigating the arm through a closed
sleeve. Indeed, strap mechanisms deliver superior security
and configurability from their inherent simplicity, reliabil-
ity, and easy use [ 23]. However, existing strap-based sys-
tems are passive, consisting of hook-and-loop or buckle straps
and demand bilateral dexterity for donning/doffing that many
older adults and patients with motor impairments lack. Thus,
assistance is frequently required tightening and closing the
straps [1]. The only attempt towards autonomous donning con-
sisted of open-architecture, pneumatically-actuated ‘fingers’
that achieve automatic upper limb enclosure through con-
trolled compressed air deformation, with magnetic elements at
the ends of the fingers providing the locking mechanism [ 24].
The total donning time was estimated to be 3.45 s, including
limb insertion and fixation, compared to 5.79 s with a pass-
ive cuff. Although this study established important ground-
work for actuated physical attachment technology, the authors
stated that the device design did not fully address the need
for autonomous donning since an operator was still required
to assist participants in donning and doffing the wearable
robot.
Our earlier research explored inflatable strap techno-
logy using Pneunets architecture for open-shell mech-
anisms, but our design suffered from several technical
limitations and failed to provide truly autonomous don-
ning. Our previous approach used dual large-volume blad-
ders and inflation-dependent closure systems, leading to
excessive pneumatic consumption and delayed release
performance [ 25]. Also, the polylactic acid (PLA) strips
in this design had a tendency to tear the silicone after
2
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 1 . Comparison of closed versus open architecture attachment systems. Top: Closed sleeve design requires precise limb insertion into
confined space, creating barriers for users with motor impairments. Bottom: open architecture using pneumatically actuated soft straps
system eliminates insertion constraints through autonomous donning sequence. The soft strap is normally-closed at the beginning without
any actuation. When air is supplied to the actuated strap, the strap inflates and unwinds to open the attachment, making it ready to accept the
upper arm. Once the limb is positioned, air inside the strap is released, causing the actuated strap to close and wrap around the upper arm.
The locking mechanism at the tip of the strap then engages with the underside of the shell attachment to secure the upper arm in place.
Finally, the strap is re-inflated to apply controlled strapping pressure, efficiently anchoring the wearer to the attachment. The participant is
then ready to move.
several inflation-deflation cycles, showing significant durab-
ility limitations for extended use. Additionally, the Pneunets
design consists of an interconnected channel network, which
inherently suffers from high system vulnerability, as fail-
ure in any single channel can result in complete system
malfunction.
Building upon lessons learned from our earlier design,
our current work presents the first fully automatic donning
strap attachment system for wearable robots that ensures user
comfort and secure fit with real-time tunable strap pressure
control. Our novel design consists of a pneumatically actu-
ated single-chamber soft strap that operates through a five-
stage sequence: it remains normally-closed without actuation,
fully opens upon pneumatic activation, automatically wraps
around the positioned limb, locks via a magnetic hook and
latch mechanism, and finally provides controlled strapping
pressure to the wearer through re-inflation. Our new design
features several technical improvements in pneumatic actu-
ation over our previous design, leading to reduced air volume
and minimized leakage risk. Finally, the design features
a silicone/PLA hybrid architecture that drastically reduces
complexity.
2. Concept
2.1 . Design criteria
We introduce a soft pneumatically actuated strap system
that tackles four persistent challenges simultaneously intro-
duced in section 1: (i) hands-free donning enabling wearer
autonomy through automatic enclosure in an open-shell set-
ting and accommodating a range of upper-arm morphologies,
(ii) repeatability of the closing system, (iii) strong enough
holding force to well secure the attachment, and (iv) avoiding
pressure-induced injury by controlling the amount of strap-
ping pressure created by the soft actuated strap. Leveraging
a silicone bending actuated strap moulded with a dissolv-
able PV A core, 3D printed reinforcement, pneumatic con-
trol, and a magnet-based latch, the proposed strap dynam-
ically conforms to the limb, secures itself without external
assistance and actively regulates pressure. The design thus tar-
gets enhanced independence, efficacy, and versatility in robot-
assisted applications.
To address these four objectives, the strap must meet
three design requirements. These criteria are intrinsic to the
3
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
strap’s mechanical and control architecture and are defined
independently of the experimental methods used to evaluate
them.
(i) Fast and reliable automatic enclosure for a range
of upper-arm anthropometrics. The attachment accommod-
ates upper-arm circumferences ranging from 220 mm to
295 mm, representing the test range validated in this proof-of-
concept study. This range reflects the anatomical variability
encountered at different attachment positions along the upper
arm length, where circumferences vary significantly from the
distal humerus near the elbow ( 220–250 mm) to the proximal
regions near the deltoid insertion [ 26]. Exoskeleton attach-
ments are commonly positioned at these locations to avoid
interference with joint motion and muscle bellies, where smal-
ler circumferences are typical compared to mid-upper arm
measurements.
The system must achieve this adaptability through
adjustable strap length mechanisms, allowing one-time calib-
ration for different users without requiring hardware reconfig-
uration or remanufacturing. The key achievement is demon-
strating that a single strap design can adapt to different circum-
ferences through length adjustment, establishing the founda-
tion for future clinical or occupational implementations that
would accommodate the full spectrum of adult anthropomet-
rics with appropriately sized strap lengths. Moreover, the strap
must transition from a fully open configuration to a latched and
pressurized state creating secure and consistent strapping pres-
sure substantially faster than the typical 40–60 s required for
manually tensioned open cuffs [ 23], preventing setup delays
from reducing therapy time, particularly in home-based or
unsupervised use and reducing donning and adjustability time
in occupational settings. Finally, the automatic-closing mech-
anism must demonstrate consistent donning time and strap-
ping pressure over the course of at least a single wearing
session, where the user may open, adjust, and re-secure the
cuff several times in quick succession. For this evaluation,
we therefore focus on immediate repeatability by testing ten
consecutive open-don-close cycles to measure variability in
donning time and pressure regulation. This repeatability is
important in clinical and home-based rehabilitation settings,
as well as occupational environments where multiple donning
and doffing cycles may occur during shift work or with shared
device usage.
(ii) Holding force and mechanical stability. When latched,
the strap must resist forces generated by the exoskeleton
during both assistive and resistive phases of movement (for
instance when used in clinical settings). In industrial upper-
limb exoskeletons, shoulder-assist devices commonly deliver
torques of 6–10 N ·m about the shoulder joint [ 27–29]. If the
strap is positioned midway along the humerus, approximately
17–19 cm from the joint center [ 30], this torque translates to
reaction forces of roughly 50 N acting radially, tangentially,
or in combination on the cuff. Furthermore, shrink-to-fit gar-
ments have demonstrated the ability to apply holding forces of
98 N maximum with a pressurized state of 25 kPa [ 15] using
ten pouch motors with 10 mm of radial length, while the pneu-
matic mechanical modules of Hasegawa et al [24] achieved a
maximum holding force of 60.9 N with a pressure of 0.4 MPa.
Consequently, the locking mechanism should be specified
to withstand at least 50 N of combined radial and shear force
without slip while minimizing air pressure, providing a com-
fortable safety margin for the highest in-use loads and optimal
energy efficiency.
(iii) Safe and actively regulated attachment pressure. The
strap applies circumferential pressure in the range of 5–15 kPa,
which is sufficient for stable fixation while remaining below
the discomfort and tissue injury thresholds reported in the
literature [13, 14, 31].
2.2. Design of the soft pneumatic actuated strap
A soft pneumatic actuated strap was designed to wrap around
a human arm in a comfortable and secure manner. The strap’s
architecture, including the silicone bending actuator, 3D-
printed reinforcement ribs, embedded pneumatic control, and
magnet-based locking mechanism were developed through
iterative prototyping to meet our design criteria.
A key improvement of our current approach over previ-
ous attachment designs is twofold: first, it enables an open
architecture compared to closed restrictive architectures, and
second, the actuated straps maintain a natural, idle bending
state without external pneumatic actuation when the system is
in its normally-closed configuration (see figure1). Unlike con-
ventional bending actuators, our actuated strap unwinds upon
actuation. Thus, when a user wishes to don the attachment,
the soft pneumatic-actuated straps are activated and unwind,
allowing the user to place their arm on the rigid shell. Once
the arm is in place, the actuated straps revert to their initial
bending state due to the rigid PLA band placed at the top of
the actuated strap to add rigidity to the inherently elastic prop-
erties of the silicone based actuated strap, effectively behaving
like a spring. This complete operating cycle is illustrated at the
bottom of figure 1 and supplemental material video.
The material selected for the bending and unwinding
action is a silicone elastomer (AS40, Consist BV , Oudenaarde,
Flanders, Belgium) with a shore hardness rating of 40A and
curing time of 6 h. This medium-soft material offers excellent
compliance while maintaining sufficient stiffness to return to
the idle, bent state. Our actuated strap design is inspired by
Zhang et al [32], who proposed a spiral soft pneumatic actu-
ator capable of performing unwinding motions. V arious design
parameters are depicted in figure2, with their respective values
summarized in table 1. These parameters were found by simu-
lation and validation, using the same pipeline as our previous
work to satisfy these specific requirements [ 25]:
• The total length (C) and wrap angle (R) of the actuated strap
should accommodate various arm sizes and morphologies
(ranging from lean to bigger builds).
• The internal thickness ( T2 − T1) should be smaller than the
external thickness ( D + H − T2) to optimize the unwinding
behavior. Additionally, the reduced internal thickness facil-
itates the actuated strap’s bulging against soft tissue, thus
establishing a baseline strapping pressure.
• The actuated strap’s width ( W) was chosen to allow the
integration of two straps into the attachment design but
4
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 2. Key design parameters of the soft strap actuator. The top view on the left-hand side shows the actuated strap with its internal and
external radii, while the side view on the right-hand side illustrates the overall width and thickness of the silicone body. The actuated strap is
designed to wrap around the upper arm, with a spiral structure that allows it to unwind when inflated.
Table 1 . Soft pneumatic actuated strap parameters values.
Parameters V alue
Total length ; C [mm] 294
Wrap angle ; 360 - R [degree]
Overall silicone width ; W [mm] 61.5
Top silicone width ; W 1 [mm] 7
Bottom silicone width ; W 2 [mm] 7
Overall chamber width ; W − W2 − W1 [mm] 47.5
Internal actuated strap radius ; D [mm] 52
Internal chamber radius ; T 1 [mm] 53.5
External chamber radius ; T 2 [mm] 55.5
Overall silicone thickness ; H [mm] 6
Thickness outside wall ; D + H − T2 [mm] 4.3
Thickness inside wall ; T1 − D [mm] 1.5
Thickness air chamber ; T2 − T1 [mm] 0.2
can be easily adjusted to incorporate additional straps if
necessary.
• The overall actuated strap thickness ( H) was minimized to
reduce bulkiness. Moreover, smaller internal cavities require
less pneumatic pressure for actuation, thus enhancing energy
efficiency.
2.3. Features for connecting strap to a physical interface
shell
The physical interface was fabricated using the same fused
deposition modeling (FDM) 3D printing method as described
above. The physical interface was designed as a shell-
shaped structure that accommodates the user’s upper arm.
Its geometry was determined based on the average upper-
arm circumference for the 95th percentile of the adult
population.
Two specific features were integrated into this physical
interface: a locking mechanism to securely maintain the actu-
ated strap attachment to the participant’s limb, and a length
adjustment mechanism to fit the attachment precisely to the
participant’s arm circumference.
2.3.1 . Magnetic locking mechanism. The locking mechan-
ism employed in this design is essential for securely hold-
ing the participant’s arm in the interface during task execu-
tion. To achieve this, a rail of cylindrical neodymium mag-
nets (Supermagnete, S-05-05-N, Germany) with dimensions
of 5 mm height and 5 mm diameter and a holding force of 940 g
per magnet pair was embedded along one side of the interface
shell. These magnets exert normal forces at the actuated strap’s
tip, counteracting the bending forces created during strap infla-
tion to create the needed strapping pressure (see green arrows
near the tip of the actuated strap depicted in figure 3). Thus,
inflation pressure is directed primarily toward the soft tissue
rather than inducing undesired unwinding motion.
To resist multidirectional forces and torques exerted by
users during movement, a mechanical hook was integrated at
the same location as the magnetic rail. When magnets in the
interface and actuated strap attract, the hook engages beneath
a complementary component on the interface shell, effectively
counteracting normal forces. Additionally, the combination of
strapping pressure and magnetic shear adhesion compensates
for shear forces (see yellow arrows in figure 3).
2.3.2. Initial strap length adjustment mechanism. To ensure
optimal strap length based on individual arm circumference,
thin slots and M3 wingnut slots were designed into the phys-
ical interface, allowing adjustment of strap length. Once the
ideal length is identified, the strap’s end is securely fixed
within the slot by tightening the wingnuts to the compression
block (see blue part in figure 3). Users who lack hand dexter-
ity may require the assistance of another person to perform this
adjustment, but it only needs to be done once for each user.
3. Methods
3.1 . Manufacturing process
The soft pneumatic actuators were fabricated using a two-
step molding and pouring process. Initially, a flat rectangular
mold featuring two protruding circular beams was 3D prin-
ted using (FDM; Ultimaker S5, Ultimaker, The Netherlands).
5
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 3. Generic physical interface with pneumatic active straps and different features such as length adjustment, compression, and
locking mechanisms. Magnetic targets are attached to the interface to attract one extremity of the pneumatic strap with a hook feature,
resulting in the locking mechanism. Additionally, a compression system with wingnut features allows adjustment of the strap length as
indicated by the blue double arrow. The green and yellow arrows indicate the direction of the normal and shear forces respectively generated
during strap inflation and natural motion of the wearer, which are counteracted by the magnetic and hook locking mechanism.
These beams serve as attachment points for subsequent mech-
anical components described in section 2.3.1.
Next, silicone base and catalyst components were mixed
and subsequently degassed in a vacuum chamber to remove
air bubbles. A first layer of the degassed silicone mixture was
poured into the mold, forming the external wall thickness. This
thickness (parameter T1-D in table 1) was precisely controlled
by a reference mark incorporated in the 3D mold design.
After approximately 90 min of the curing period elapsed,
a thin (0.2 mm) layer of polyvinyl alcohol (PV A; Ultimaker,
Utrecht, The Netherlands) film was manually placed into the
mold to form the internal cavity. This printed cavity geo-
metry also enabled external tubing connections. Due to PV A ’s
water-soluble property, this internal film could be conveni-
ently removed after the silicone had fully cured. Subsequently,
a second silicone layer was poured over the PV A film, sealing
the actuated strap (see figure 4).
After complete curing, the actuated strap was removed from
the mold, and water was flushed through the internal cavity
using a needle and syringe to dissolve and remove the PV A
material. The actuated strap was then subjected to post-curing
in an oven at 60 ◦C for 30 min, optimizing the mechanical
properties of the silicone. The total fabrication time for each
actuated strap is approximately seven hours, with the possibil-
ity of multiple actuated straps to be produced simultaneously.
As noted earlier, the actuated strap was reinforced with a
stiffer material to optimize its unwinding motion and minimize
axial elongation. A 2 mm-thick strip of rigid PLA was bonded
to the back of the silicone body with Sil-Poxy (Smooth-On,
USA). The PLA strip was then thermoformed to match the tar-
get curvature specified in table 1. This reinforcement helps the
actuated strap tip, where the magnets and hook mechanism are
located, to align precisely with the corresponding magnets on
the interface, ensuring reliable automatic closure at the correct
angle.
3.2. Validation experiments
Each of our design criteria was validated through quantit-
ative evaluation of the active strap performance in a series
of experiments. To perform all experiments, two designed
soft pneumatic straps were integrated into a custom pneu-
matic test bench, adapted from Ferrentino et al [33], that regu-
lated actuated strap pressure. The bench employs a three-way
proportional pressure regulator (VEAB-L26-D7-Q4-A4-1R1,
Festo, Germany) whose inlet is connected to the laboratory
compressed-air line and whose outlet is routed to the actu-
ated straps through a dedicated printed-circuit board (PCB)
and pneumatic manifold (Festo QSY Series Y Tube-to-Tube
Adaptor, Festo, Germany) to split the regulated pressure
between the two straps. The PCB drives the valve and monitors
an on-board pressure sensor, allowing it to impose any desired
pressure–time profile on the actuated straps. Finally, the two
straps were integrated into the physical interface described
in section 2.3 that is fixed into an aluminum frame with
the sole purpose of providing stability. All post–processing
and figure generation were performed in MA TLAB R2021b
(MathWorks, Natick, MA).
3.2.1 . Adaptability to a range of anthropometrics, donning
time, and closure repeatability . These three features
were assessed in one set of experiments testing consecut-
ive closure for arm mock-ups and human arm. Strap length
was first adjusted via the wing-nut compression system in
a one-time calibration to secure each test circumference.
6
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 4. Manufacturing process of the soft pneumatic actuators. Silicone rubber is poured into a 3D-printed mold featuring protruding
beams that serve as insertion points for screws in the subsequent locking mechanism assembly. After approximately 90 min of curing, a
dissolvable PV A film is carefully positioned to define the internal air cavity geometry. Subsequently, the remaining silicone mixture is
poured to encapsulate the PV A film and complete the actuator fabrication.
Cylindrical arm mock-ups of 220 mm and 282 mm circumfer-
ences were 3D printed, and a human participant with a 294 mm
arm circumference (male, 26 years, 1.68 m, 63 kg) was also
recruited. The study was approved by the Human Sciences
Ethics Committee at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (Reference
Number: ECHW600), complied with the principles of the
declaration of Helsinki and written informed consent was
obtained.
Each arm mock-up was tested using the following proced-
ure: the two straps were opened through pressurization, then
the arm mock-up or human arm was placed into the inter-
face. Once positioned, the air inside the straps was released
and the straps wrapped around the arm mock-up or human
arm with the securing/holding function provided by magnets
and hooks to make sure the straps are well secured. Finally,
a strapping pressure of 13 kPa measured at the output of the
regulator valve was applied to the straps to secure the entire
system. This pressure was chosen based on pilot testing with
the participant’s upper-arm to ensure comfortable and secure
attachment. This cycle was performed ten times sequentially
for each arm mock-up, and five times sequentially for the par-
ticipant’s arm using the pneumatic setup, to evaluate repeatab-
ility. Metrics recorded were success rate of closure and don-
ning time, defined as the interval from the start of actuated
strap inflation to open the interface until the target strapping
pressure was reached on the arm mock-up or the participant’s
upper arm (figure 5).
3.2.2. Holding force and mechanical stability . Holding
force and mechanical stability were evaluated by testing
whether the straps can sustain user-applied loads without
detachment. Loads of 3 kg, 5 kg and 8 kg (30, 50 and 80 N)
were applied sequentially to the active interface, mounted
on an upper-arm mock-up of representative circumference.
Knowing the test frame in which the active interface was
mounted has a weight of 3 kg, by adding 2 kg and 5 kg
masses, normal forces of approximately 30 N, 50 N, and 80 N
were applied to the straps for a duration of 20 s. The largest
load (80 N) exceeds the reaction force of approximately 50 N
expected from typical shoulder-assist exoskeleton torques (6–
10 N·m) at the mid-humerus position. Testing beyond the
expected load provides a safety margin for dynamic move-
ments and varying user strength levels. Holding forces were
assessed in both the normal and tangential directions. For the
axial (shear) test, the participant positioned the arm as close
as possible to the torso, and the straps were tightened to a set-
point of 13 kPa thanks to the pneumatic test bench (figure 6).
3.2.3. Regulated strapping pressure. We evaluated how
well the system regulated strapping pressure once the arm is
fully enclosed and latched. The experiment setup consisted
of a custom limb mock-up, commercial pressure sensors, and
the pneumatic test bench. A mock-up upper-arm was 3D prin-
ted with recessed slots that accept pressure sensors (MPRLS,
7
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 5. Different circumferences assessed for automatic donning: two mock-up arms with constant circumferences of 220 mm and
282 mm, and an upper arm with a maximum of 294 mm at the belly of the biceps brachii muscle. Two straps are used as dual units to
enclose the arm in the physical interface.
Figure 6. Holding force in the normal direction (left) and holding force in the shear direction (right). The main frame where the shell is
mounted has a mass of 3 kg, and additional weights of 2 kg and 5 kg have been attached to make 5 kg and 8 kg total for the normal direction
(blue). For the shear direction, the arm is maintained as vertical as possible to assess how the straps hold a load in the shear direction (red).
8
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 7 . Left: Embedded barometric pressure sensors inserted into a 3D-printed mock-up upper-arm to assess the pressure applied by the
actuated strap. The sensors are sealed with silicone to ensure airtightness and are placed in the mock-up upper-arm’s cavities. The sensors
simulate and measure the pressure that would be applied to the soft tissue by the actuated strap during inflation. Right: Indenter used for
applying known forces to the sensors during calibration.
Adafruit; see figure 7). The MPRLS units are absolute baro-
metric sensors housed in small airtight cavities within a silic-
one matrix. We positioned the barometric sensors at locations
where maximum strap-limb contact occurs, specifically at the
superior aspect of the upper arm where the cylindrical approx-
imation is most valid and where attachment pressures are typ-
ically applied. They were fabricated using a two-step molding
process. The first step involved inserting the sensor’s tube into
a predefined hole in the 3D-printed rectangular mold, which
features a rectangular prominence that creates the sensor cav-
ity. We refer to this as the top part of the mold. The second
step involves sealing the top part with a bottom mold piece.
When an external force compresses the cavity wall, the trapped
air becomes pressurized, and the sensor reports the resulting
pressure increase. By monitoring these sensors while vary-
ing the internal air pressure, we quantified the relationship
between actuated strap inflation and the supposed pressure
applied to soft tissue. Pressure data from the MPRLS sensors
are acquired by a Teensy 4.1 microcontroller (PJRC, USA)
over the I2C bus and logged to CSV files.
The first experiment determined how mechanical pressure
translates into barometric pressure and the reliability of this
relationship. Consequently, each sensor first had to be calib-
rated so that a measured pressure change could be conver-
ted to an equivalent mechanical load. To apply known nor-
mal forces, a compression rig based on [ 34] and consisting of
a platform frame and a modular indenter was used (figure 7
— Right). The frame is built from 15 mm aluminum plates
and 40 × 40 profiles. A grid of threaded holes on the top
plate aligns with the indenter’s compression bolt to load the
target pressure sensor. Rotating the bolt moves the indenter
head downward via internal transmission components such
as two sliders and a buffer spring, compressing the sensor.
The indenter has its own load-cell (FX293X-040B0100-L, TE
Connectivity, China), and an Arduino Uno acquires the load-
cell data. The resulting relationship was then used to allow the
mechanical load exerted by the actuated strap to be inferred
directly from the pressure data during the strapping experi-
ments. We performed a linear regression using the equation
Pbarometric = a · Pmechanical and evaluated quality of fit with the
coefficient of determination (R2), where Pbarometric is the pres-
sure measured by the barometric sensor (kPa), Pmechanical is
the externally applied mechanical pressure (kPa), and a is
the calibration slope coefficient. We assumed that the rela-
tionship between mechanical pressure and barometric pres-
sure is linear, disregarding membrane effects of the baromet-
ric sensor embedded in silicone. We consider this effect to be
negligible compared to the mechanical pressure applied to the
embedded silicone pressure sensor. This part of the experiment
aims to establish a first-order approximation of the relationship
between mechanical pressure and the pressure applied to the
soft tissue of the user using barometric pressure sensors.
Furthermore, we performed a series of experiments to eval-
uate control of strapping pressure. This required validation of
the repeatability of the combined pneumatic test bench, pres-
sure sensor, and actuated straps system and establishment of
the mathematical relationship between mechanical pressure
applied normal to a sensor/limb and the air pressure inside the
actuated strap. We evaluated the repeatability of the air pres-
sure regulation by calculating the standard deviation of baro-
metric pressure over ten consecutive inflation-deflation cycles.
Then, the final experiment linked the pneumatic pressure com-
manded to the straps with the circumferential pressure meas-
ured on the mock-up arm with embedded sensors. When the
straps are in their closed configuration, they make direct con-
tact with the exposed pressure sensors. The recessed slots of
the mock-up arm have a depth that is less than the height of the
MPRLS units embedded in silicone, ensuring the sensor faces
9
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
remain exposed and accessible to direct strap contact. Upon
inflation, the straps provide circumferential pressure directly
to the cylinder surface and the sensors beneath. We assume
uniform circumferential pressure distribution along the strap
length, and the sensor membrane width matches the strap
width to capture representative pressure measurements. Strap
pressure was ramped in discrete steps while the two embed-
ded sensors recorded the load on the cylinder with embedded
barometric pressure sensors on its surface. We performed a
linear regression between the strap pressure measured by the
pneumatic test bench and the sensor pressure Pbarometric. The
final relationship between mechanical pressure (normal to the
limb) and strap air pressure can be expressed as Pmechanical =
c
a · Pstraps and evaluated quality of fit with the Pearson correl-
ation coefficient r and p-value p, where Pmechanical is the cir-
cumferential pressure applied to the mock-up arm (kPa),Pstraps
is the internal air pressure within the pneumatic straps (kPa),
c and a are calibration coefficients derived from the experi-
mental relationships, r is the Pearson correlation coefficient
indicating the strength of the linear relationship, and p is the
statistical significance p-value.
4. Results
4.1 . Adaptability , donning time, and repeatability
All iterations for every limb circumference achieved com-
plete closure (see video in the supplemental materials), and
the corresponding donning times are 27.68 ± 1.24 s for the
220 mm cylinder circumference arm mock-up, 27.84 ± 0.77
s for the 282 mm cylinder circumference arm mock-up and
29.01 ± 0.41 s for the 294 mm human upper-arm.
4.2. Holding force
The straps held normal loads up to∼80 N and shear loads up to
∼32.5 N (as depicted in figure 6) without detachment or slip-
page for the full test duration of 20 s. An example of hold-
ing force in the normal direction is shown in the supplemental
material video.
4.3. Control of strapping pressure
The combined pneumatic test bench, pressure sensor, and
actuated straps system maintained consistent air pressures over
consecutive iterations.
A consistent linear relationship was found between the
mechanical load applied to the silicone-embedded baromet-
ric pressure sensor and the pressure that it records. Figure 8
on the left presents three independent trials in which a calib-
rated indenter exerted progressively larger normal forces on
the sensor. The data reveal high trial-to-trial repeatability and
an approximately linear correlation between mechanical pres-
sure and barometric pressure. Given the equation Pbarometric =
a · Pmechanical, the mean slope of the linear fits corresponds to an
average value of a = 0.75 with the coefficient of determination
R2 of 98%. Thus, a 1 kPa increase in externally applied mech-
anical pressure corresponds to a 0.75 kPa increase in the pres-
sure reported by the embedded sensor. Furthermore, figure 8
on the right overlays the raw traces from the two sensors as
the straps were inflated for 20 s and then vented. Across all
ten iterations, the two sensors track the strap pressure almost
identically, and the standard-deviation bands remain narrow,
measured at 0.02 kPa for both straps.
Finally, figure 9 on the left shows the response of the
sensors from a stair-like increasing pressure over time.
Alongside figure 9 on the right, we also found a consistent
linear relationship between the increasing pneumatic pressure
commanded to the straps and the embedded sensor pressure.
The final relationship between strap pressure and mechanical
pressure is Pmechanical = 0.76
0.75 · Pstraps. Thus, 1 kPa of internal air
pressure in the active strap produces around 1.01 kPa of cir-
cumferential (mechanical) pressure on the upper arm.
5. Discussion
Our novel active straps show proof-of-concept for the first
fully automatic self-donning attachment system for wearable
robots. First of all, repeatability and adaptability were con-
firmed by validating effective closure in 10 consecutive trials
for arm circumferences of 220–294 mm with an average don-
ning time of 27.7 ± 1.0 s showing improvements over pass-
ive attachments methods. Adaptation to different arm sizes
was achieved using the same compression-slot and wing-nut
adjustment hardware. Larger arm circumferences than the
ones tested can also be accommodated with a longer strap
body, leaving the pneumatic geometry unchanged. However,
reliable automatic opening and closing are achieved only when
the attachment is in a horizontal configuration. In a vertical
orientation, the straps sag under their own weight and do not
align with the magnets for closure. Future work will explore
adding stiffer or variable-stiffness elements so the straps can
support their own weight during closure and remain compliant
once latched. These design changes should improve donning
for a variety of configurations, which is especially important
for lower limb attachments.
Our design achieved similar holding forces as previ-
ous work with superior strapping pressure efficiency. While
Diteesawat et al achieved 98 N maximum holding force at
25 kPa [15] and Hasegawa et al achieved 60.9 N at 0.4 MPa
[24], our design achieves 80 N normal force and 32.5 N shear
force at significantly lower pressure applied to the straps
(13 kPa). Normal-direction strength comes chiefly from the
hook mechanism, while the magnets contribute to the shear
adhesion ( ≈190 g per magnet according to the manufacturer
datasheet (Supermagnete, S-05-05-N, Germany)) along with
the friction provided by the strapping pressure. While our
study tested a limited number or repetitions due to practical
constraints, future work should test many more inflation and
deflation cycles to verify long-term life-cycle performance.
Regarding our pressure measurement methodology, we
acknowledge that our barometric sensor calibration represents
a simplified approach with known limitations including small
10
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Figure 8. Left: Mechanical pressure applied to the sensor over three individual trials shows a linear relationship ( R2 = 98%) with a slope of
0.75, meaning each 1 kPa increase in pneumatic pressure yields a 0.75 kPa increase in sensor output. Right: Overlay of 10 consecutive
inflation-deflation cycles showing repeatability of the barometric pressure sensors. Both sensors demonstrate repeatable and consistent
pressure profiles over time.
Figure 9. Left: Air pressure inside the respective straps linearly increasing, monitored by both pressure sensors. The pink solid line shows
the measured pneumatic test bench pressure applied to both straps, while the blue and red lines are the barometric data for each pressure
sensor. Right: Sensor data versus strap pressure shows a strong linear relationship ( r = 99%, p = 10−9); a slope of 0.76 means each 1 kPa
increase in air pressure yields a 0.76 kPa rise in circumferential pressure.
edge effects, and boundary condition differences between cal-
ibration and application scenarios. However, this first-order
approximation is appropriate and sufficient for our proof-of-
concept objectives. The key achievement is not precise bio-
mechanical quantification, but demonstration of the linear,
predictable relationship between commanded air pressure and
applied mechanical load ( r = 99%, p = 10−9). This linearity
enables the core functionality we sought to prove: controllable,
repeatable pressure modulation for autonomous attachment
systems. Our approach successfully validates the feasibility of
real-time pressure control in soft pneumatic straps, which is
the primary innovation of this work. While more sophisticated
pressure measurement techniques would be valuable for clin-
ical implementation such as a range of FSRs distributed across
the cirfumference, our simplified method adequately demon-
strates the proof-of-concept for pressure-controlled autonom-
ous donning systems.
Our attachment system’s precise dynamic control of phys-
ical interface pressure demonstrates feasibility for real-time
control strategies to improve both energy efficiency and user
comfort. Previous work suggests a trade-off between energy
transmission efficiency and human comfort with interface
pressure: energy transmission between the human body and
exoskeleton attachment increases with interface pressure, but
there is a human tolerance limit for interface pressure. Such
a trade-off may be overcome by dynamic control of physical
interface pressure, which our system enables via precise, lin-
ear control of internal strap air pressure. Thus, we envision
an attachment system that increases interface pressure only
when needed for energy transmission and decreases pressure
otherwise to reduce human discomfort. Adaptive control of
pressure is critical for physical attachments around human
limbs, because continuous circumferential pressure, even at
low levels, can diminish comfort and pain tolerance over time
1 1
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
[13]. While this study validates the pneumatic actuation prin-
ciples using laboratory air supply, practical deployment would
require integration with portable pneumatic systems. Our sys-
tem’s relatively low operating pressure (13 kPa) represents a
significant advantage over existing solutions, requiring sub-
stantially lower pressure input than comparable pneumatic
attachment systems. For comparison, Diteesawatet al required
25 kPa and Hasegawa et al required 400 kPa to achieve sim-
ilar holding forces as pointed out before, making our sys-
tem 2–30x more pressure-efficient than existing designs. This
reduced pressure demand, combined with our single-chamber
architecture, makes the system highly compatible with exist-
ing portable pneumatic platforms that have limited pressure
output capabilities. The measured pressure translation ratio
of 1.01 kPa mechanical pressure per 1 kPa internal air pres-
sure demonstrates near-optimal pressure transmission, mean-
ing portable pneumatic controllers can operate at their lower
pressure ranges while still achieving target strapping forces.
Wearable pneumatic controllers such as FlowIO and others can
deliver the required pressure range (up to 30 psi) with compact
form factors suitable for integration into exoskeleton systems
[35, 36]. The low pressure requirements of our system ensure
these portable controllers can operate efficiently without being
pushed to their maximum output limits, extending battery life
and reducing system weight for practical field deployment.
While our study demonstrates proof-of-concept, we envi-
sion improvements to our current design to make fully
autonomous user donning and doffing more practical. For
example, the system could detect limb insertion and auto-
matically initiate strap closure, enabling complete hands-
free transitions for each step of the donning process (i.e.
open-don-close-secure) instead of relying on a predetermined
timer to transition between states. Indeed, future work should
address this limitation through integrated sensing approaches.
Autonomous donning could be triggered by limb-detection
using integrated force/pressure sensors within the interface
to detect when the arm is properly positioned, defining a
threshold in the normal direction and allowing signal stabil-
ization time. This approach would provide additional insights
about limb-interface interactions under different strapping
pressures during activities, which we are currently investig-
ating for future studies.
Besides automatic donning, a key technical challenge for
smooth usage of exoskeletons would be adding autonom-
ous doffing capability, which is not possible with the current
magnetic-hook latch mechanism. The strong magnetic force
that enables secure fastening also prevents easy release, cre-
ating a design trade-off between holding strength and user
independence. Two promising approaches could address this
challenge: First, inspired by Hasegawa et al ’s design, local-
ized silicone bladders could be positioned between oppos-
ing magnet poles and actuated pneumatically to separate
them when release is needed [ 24]. This approach could util-
ize hardware sequencing techniques for independent pneu-
matic control from the same air source used for inflating-
deflating the straps and activating strapping pressure, allow-
ing the system to separate magnets from their attraction field
using existing pneumatic infrastructure [ 37]. Alternatively,
electro-permanent magnets (EPMs) could replace conven-
tional magnets, allowing magnetic attraction to be switched
on/off through brief current pulses that reverse pole direc-
tion. EPMs offer energy-efficient operation since power is only
required during switching transitions (milliseconds), not for
maintaining attachment states as traditional electromagnets
would require [38, 39].
6. Conclusions
We developed the first autonomously-donned limb attachment
for wearable robots and validated its closure reliability, adapt-
ability to user anthropometrics, holding security, and inter-
face pressure regulation capabilities. Our open-architecture
design combines pneumatically-actuated, single-chamber soft
straps for wrapping around the limb with a magnet–hook latch
for securing closure. We developed quantitative design cri-
teria based on published requirements for upper-limb exo-
skeleton attachments and presented a reproducible fabrica-
tion method combining silicone elastomers with 3D-printed
reinforcements. We experimentally validated all design cri-
teria: reliable automatic closure for ten consecutive cycles;
anthropometric adaptability to arm circumferences of 220–
294 mm without hardware modification; autonomous donning
in under 30 s; holding forces surpassing the clinical reac-
tion load requirement of 50 N (generated by 8 N ·m torque at
mid-humerus); and safe interface pressure consistently limited
below 15 kPa. Future work will improve donning versatility
through variable-stiffness materials. By demonstrating feasib-
ility for fully autonomous donning, we address a key require-
ment for self-directed use of wearable robots. Our technology
could allow more time for therapy in rehabilitation settings,
independent use at home, and improve efficiency and user
adoption in industrial environments
Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly
available at the following URL/DOI: https://youtube.com/
shorts/RCwds0hIdH4.
Supplementary Data Video available at https://doi.org/10.
1088/1361-665X/ae2555/data1.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the FWO Strategic Basic
Research project Revalexo (Grant No. S001024N). Kevin
Langlois is a postdoctoral fellow of the Research Foundation
Flanders (FWO) with FWO Grant 1258523 N.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
12
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
Author contributions
Christopher van Vlerken  0000-0001-9996-6953
Conceptualization (lead), Data curation (lead), Formal
analysis (lead), Investigation (lead), Methodology (lead),
Resources (equal), Software (lead), V alidation (lead),
Visualization (lead), Writing – original draft (lead), Writing –
review & editing (lead)
Kevin Langlois  0000-0002-7991-0976
Conceptualization (supporting), Methodology (supporting),
Writing – review & editing (supporting)
Mengnan Wu  0000-0002-0341-4909
Methodology (supporting), Writing – review &
editing (supporting)
Bram V anderborght 0000-0003-4881-9341
Funding acquisition (lead), Writing – review &
editing (supporting)
Tom V erstraten 0000-0001-7398-5398
Conceptualization (supporting), Funding acquisition (lead),
Project administration (lead), Writing – review &
editing (supporting)
References
[1] Ashraf S G 2018 Robotic exoskeletons: the current pros and
cons World J. Orthopedics 9 112–9
[2] Elprama S A, V anderborght B and Jacobs A 2022 An
industrial exoskeleton user acceptance framework based on
a literature review of empirical studies Appl. Ergon.
100 103615
[3] Heslin M, Forster A, Healey A and Patel A 2015 A systematic
review of the economic evidence for interventions for
family carers of stroke patients Clin. Rehabil. 30 119–33
[4] Parker E, Swint J, Godwin K and Ostwald S 2012 Examining
the cost per caregiver of an intervention designed to
improve the quality of life of spousal caregivers of stroke
survivors Rehabil. Nurs. 37 244–51
[5] Wright M et al 2023 Multicentric investigation on the safety,
feasibility and usability of the able lower-limb robotic
exoskeleton for individuals with spinal cord injury: a
framework towards the standardisation of clinical
evaluations J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. 20 45
[6] Siedl S M and Mara M 2021 Exoskeleton acceptance and its
relationship to self-efficacy enhancement, perceived
usefulness and physical relief: a field study among logistics
workers Wear . Technol.2 e10
[7] Shore L, Power V , De Eyto A and O’Sullivan L W 2018
Technology acceptance and user-centred design of assistive
exoskeletons for older adults: a commentary Robotics 7 3
[8] José L P 2008 Wearable Robots: Biomechatronic Exoskeletons
(Wiley)
[9] Y andell M B 2019 Understanding human-exosuit interaction
via physical interfaces
[10] Schiele A and van der Helm F C T 2009 Influence of
attachment pressure and kinematic configuration on phri
with wearable robots Appl. Bionics Biomech. 6 157–73
[11] Bessler J, Prange-Lasonder G B, Schaake L, Saenz J F,
Bidard C, Fassi I, V alori M, Lassen A B and Buurke J H
2021 Safety assessment of rehabilitation robots: a review
identifying safety skills and current knowledge gaps Front.
Robot. AI 8 33
[12] Akiyama Y , Okamoto S, Y amada Y and Ishiguro K 2016
Measurement of contact behavior including slippage of cuff
when using wearable physical assistant robot IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. A 24 784–93
[13] Kermavnar T, O’Sullivan K J, de Eyto A and O’Sullivan L W
2020 Discomfort/pain and tissue oxygenation at the lower
limb during circumferential compression: application to
soft exoskeleton design Hum. Factors 62 475–88
[14] Kozinc ˇZiga, Babic ˇ J andˇSarabon N 2021 Human pressure
tolerance and effects of different padding materials with
implications for development of exoskeletons and similar
devices Appl. Ergon. 93 103379
[15] Diteesawat R S, Hoh S, Pulvirenti E, Rahman N, Morris L,
Turton A, Cramp M and Rossiter J 2022 A soft fabric-based
shrink-to-fit pneumatic sleeve for comfortable limb
assistance 2022 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS) pp 9766–73
[16] Schäffer K, Fallon U and Coad M M 2024 Stretchable
pneumatic sleeve for adaptable, low-displacement
anchoring in exosuits 2024 IEEE 7th Int. Conf. on Soft
Robotics (RoboSoft) pp 912–8
[17] Langlois K, Rodriguez-Cianca D, Serrien B, De Winter J,
V erstraten T, Rodriguez-Guerrero C, V anderborght B and
Lefeber D 2021 Investigating the effects of strapping
pressure on human-robot interface dynamics using a soft
robotic cuff IEEE Trans. Med. Robot. Bionics 3 146–55
[18] Hasegawa Y , Tayama M, Saito T and Sankai Y 2011 Active air
mat for comfortable and easy to wear a forearm support
system 2011 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems pp 4899–904
[19] Fischer N, Alagi H, Beigl M, Hein B and Mathis-Ullrich F
2023 A compliant actuator-sensor unit using a shape
memory alloy and capacitive force sensing for active
exoskeleton interfaces 2023 IEEE-RAS 22nd Int. Conf. on
Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) pp 1–7
[20] Kabel A, McBee-Black K and Dimka J 2016 Apparel-related
participation barriers: ability, adaptation and engagement
Disabil. Rehabil. 38 2184–92
[21] Kabel A, Dimka J and McBee-Black K 2017 Clothing-related
barriers experienced by people with mobility disabilities
and impairments Appl. Ergon. 59 165–9
[22] Shi Y , Dong W, Lin W and Gao Y 2022 Soft wearable robots:
development status and technical challenges Sensors
22 7584
[23] Zimmermann Y , Song J, Deguelle C, Läderach J, Zhou L,
Hutter M, Riener R and Wolf P 2023 Human-robot
attachment system for exoskeletons: design and
performance analysis IEEE Trans. Robot. 39 3087–105
[24] Hasegawa Y , Hasegawa T and Eguchi K 2014 Pneumatic
tubular body fixture for wearable assistive device – Analysis
and design of active cuff to hold upper limb – 2014
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems pp
2140–5
[25] van Vlerken C, Ballen-Moreno F, Roels E, Ferrentino P ,
Langlois K, V anderborght B and V erstraten T 2023
Development of an active physical interface for physical
human-robot interaction: investigation of soft pneumatic
actuator straps for automatic enclosure system Actuators
12 241
[26] Bonso E, Saladini F, Zanier A, Benetti E, Dorigatti F and
Palatini P 2010 Accuracy of a single rigid conical cuff with
standard-size bladder coupled to an automatic oscillometric
device over a wide range of arm circumferences Hypertens.
Res. 33 1186–91
[27] Rossini M, De Bock S, Ducastel V , V an De V elde G, De
Pauw K, V erstraten T, Lefeber D, Geeroms J and
Rodriguez-Guerrero C 2025 Design and evaluation of
AE4W: an active and flexible shaft-driven shoulder
exoskeleton for workers Wear . Technol.6 e12
13
Smart Mater. Struct. 34 (2025) 127001 C van Vlerken et al
[28] Sänger J, Y ao Z, Schubert T, Wolf A, Molz C, Miehling J,
Wartzack S, Gwosch T, Matthiesen S and Weidner R 2022
Evaluation of active shoulder exoskeleton support to deduce
application-oriented optimization potentials for overhead
work Appl. Sci. 12 10805
[29] van Sluijs R, Scholtysik T, Brunner A, Kuoni L, Bee D,
Kos M, Bartenbach V and Lambercy O 2024 Design and
evaluation of the OmniSuit: a passive occupational
exoskeleton for back and shoulder support Appl. Ergon.
120 104332
[30] Bishop C W, Bowen P E and Ritchey S J 1981 Norms for
nutritional assessment of American adults by upper arm
anthropometry Am. J. Clin. Nutrition 34 2530–9
[31] Bessler-Etten J, Schaake L, Buurke J H and
Prange-Lasonder G B 2024 Investigating change of
discomfort during repetitive force exertion though an
exoskeleton cuff Appl. Ergon. 115 104055
[32] Zhang Z, Wang X, Meng D and Liang B 2021 Bioinspired
spiral soft pneumatic actuator and its characterization J.
Bionic Eng. 18 1101–16
[33] Ferrentino P , López-Díaz A, Terryn S, Legrand J, Brancart J,
V an Assche G, V ázquez E, V ázquez A and V anderborght B
2022 Quasi-Static FEA model for a multi-material soft
pneumatic actuator in SOFA IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.
7 7391–8
[34] Chen H, Wang Z, Langlois K, V erstraten T and
V anderborght B 2024 A structure modality enhanced
multimodal imaging method for electrical impedance
tomography pressure distribution measurement IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas. 73 1–13
[35] Shtarbanov A 2021 FlowIO development platform — the
pneumatic ‘Raspberry Pi’ for soft robotics Extended
Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conf. on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI EA’21 (Association for
Computing Machinery) pp 1–6
[36] Zhou Y M et al 2024 A portable inflatable soft wearable robot
to assist the shoulder during industrial work Sci. Robot.
9 eadi2377
[37] Gorissen B, Milana E, Baeyens A, Broeders E, Christiaens J,
Collin K, Reynaerts D and De V older M 2018 Hardware
sequencing of inflatable nonlinear actuators for autonomous
soft robots Adv. Mater .31 1804598
[38] Ochoa-Cardenas F and Dodd T J 2015 Design of an active
magnetic wheel with a varying electro-permanent magnet
adhesion mechanism 2015 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) pp 3340–5
[39] Gholizadeh A, Abbaslou S, Xie P , Knaian A and Javanmard M
2019 Electronically actuated microfluidic valves with zero
static-power consumption using electropermanent magnets
Sens. Actuators A 296 316–23
14