Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1234
nature electronics
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
An 18-g haptic feedback ring with a three-axis 
force-sensing skin
 
Sunju Kang    1,2,5, Mustafa Mete    3,5, Srinivas Gandla    1, Dila Türkmen4, 
Rohit Kadungamparambil John3, Merve Acer Kalafat    4, Sunkook Kim    1  & 
Jamie Paik    3 
Wearable human–machine interfaces could provide immersive, 
multisensory interactions, turning everyday items into smart haptic 
devices for virtual and augmented reality. However, the development of 
tactile wearables with kinaesthetic feedback remains limited by the size 
and weight of the devices, which restricts portability and comfort. Here we 
report a haptic ring that weighs 18 g and offers three-degrees-of-freedom 
force sensing and feedback. The system has an origami-inspired structural 
base that provides efficient and compact force transmission, and a soft 
force-sensing skin capable of simultaneously detecting shear and normal 
forces. The force-sensing skin is made by combining a topology-optimized, 
laser-patterned layer that has pyramid microstructures with a layer with 
four resistive pixels, an approach that ensures linear sensitivity and a rapid 
response time. The ring, which is powered by soft pneumatic actuators and 
integrated with inkjet-printed bending sensors, can provide kinaesthetic 
force feedback of up to 6.5 N.
Haptic interfaces are designed to convey a sense of touch1– 3, and can 
be categorized into cutaneous and kinaesthetic feedback devices. 
Cutaneous devices primarily stimulate the skin’s mechanoreceptors 
with vibrotactile4–6 , thermal7 and skin deformation8–10  cues, whereas 
kinaesthetic devices provide larger forces and torques, simulating 
object shape and stiffness for deeper, joint-based sensations. Multi-
modal haptic interfaces that combine both cutaneous and kinaesthetic 
feedback11–13  for a more realistic sense of touch have also been devel-
oped. However, wearability is an important consideration for the wider 
use of such interfaces. Although wearable cutaneous haptic interfaces 
are relatively common14– 17, the bulkiness and weight of kinaesthetic 
devices remain an issue.
Existing wearable haptic interfaces typically focus on the hands 
and fingers18– 20, the primary sites for human physical interaction due 
to their high degree of freedom (DoF) and high mechanoreceptor den-
sity21. Finger-based haptic interfaces22– 25 tend to focus on vibrotactile 
or thermal feedback, with limited capability for kinaesthetic force 
feedback. Fingers can generate a large force26, as well as sense minute 
force increments, down to approximately 100 mN (refs. 27,28). As such, 
kinaesthetic haptic interfaces for the fingers must accurately render 
forces and torques to convey a realistic tactile experience. However, 
most existing designs are bulky and heavy, as they rely on rigid mecha-
nisms and conventional electromechanical motors to produce these 
forces19,20. Alternative approaches include soft fluidic-driven actuators 
for haptic gloves29 and folding-based mechanisms for miniaturization, 
such as a compact handheld kinaesthetic joystick 30. However, these 
solutions lack embedded multiaxis force sensing to ensure accuracy, 
and instead rely on force estimation.
High-fidelity force feedback in kinaesthetic wearable devices 
requires force sensing with good linear sensitivity and rapid response. 
In particular, force sensors capable of the real-time detection of multi-
axial force magnitudes and directions within compact form factors are 
needed31. Various types of force sensor have been explored, includ -
ing capacitive, resistive, magnetic, piezoelectric and triboelectric 
Received: 21 January 2025
Accepted: 3 November 2025
Published online: 18 December 2025
 Check for updates
1Multifunctional Nano Bio-Electronics Lab, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea. 2Querrey Simpson Institute for Bioelectronics, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL, USA. 3Reconfigurable Robotics Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. 4Flexible Systems 
Laboratory, Istanbul Technical University, İstanbul, Türkiye. 5These authors contributed equally: Sunju Kang, Mustafa Mete.  e-mail: seonkuk@skku.edu; 
jamie.paik@epfl.ch
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246
 1235
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
The ring detects multiaxis tactile interactions and can recreate the 
shape and stiffness of virtual objects through its embedded three-axis 
force-sensing skin and inkjet-printed bending sensors (Fig. 1a). The 
three-axis force-sensing skin consists of two stacked layers: an upper 
layer with three-dimensional (3D) microstructures and a lower layer 
segmented into four resistive-type extended electrode regions (Fig. 1b).
We use topology-optimized 3D microstructures, fabricated with 
high-precision micromanufacturing techniques, and design patterns 
on both layers. As a result, the sensor offers high sensitivity, linear -
ity and fast response times. The sensor decouples normal and shear 
forces, providing accurate detection of complex human–machine 
interactions. With such multimodal sensing and actuation capabilities, 
the OriRing can offer bidirectional tactile communication in online 
and virtual environments (Fig. 1c). T o illustrate the capabilities of our 
approach in virtual reality (VR), we develop a custom VR environment 
in which users interact with virtual objects, receiving size and stiffness 
information through tactile cues. The multimodal sensors of the OriR-
ing allow users to modify the virtual properties of the object, such as 
size and stiffness, via intuitive swipe gestures.
Force-feedback haptic ring design
The OriRing is a finger-sized, multimodal haptic interface that enables 
bidirectional tactile communication between the digital and physical 
sensors32– 34. Among these, piezoresistive force sensors are of particular 
interest due to their simple architecture and operational mechanisms.
The performance of piezoresistive force sensors can be optimized 
through microstructures, such as pyramids, domes, pillars and porous 
designs33,34. Sensor sensitivity can be tuned for specific or broadband 
detection applications through architectures such as hierarchical 
and stacking structures. For instance, stacking-interlocked dome 
geometries can provide tunable linear sensitivity35. A bioinspired hier-
archical structural array has also been used to enhance sensitivity and 
linearity36, and microstructured elastomer geometries have been used 
to tune sensitivity37. In addition, a graded intrafillable architecture has 
been used to provide broad range and high sensitivity 38. Functional 
conductive composite materials can be used to simultaneously detect 
multiple stimuli39. However, composite-based sensors are often vulner-
able to environmental factors, which can degrade performance over 
time, and factors such as humidity and temperature fluctuations can 
compromise their long-term stability.
In this Article, we report a wearable haptic ring that provides 
kinaesthetic and proprioceptive feedback. Our ring, which we term 
the OriRing, weighs 18 g (excluding the pneumatic control unit) and 
delivers up to 6.5 N of force feedback via a compact form factor, high 
power-to-weight ratio soft pneumatic actuator (SPA), origami trans-
mission, folding joints, and lightweight force and position sensors. 
c
Object size
modulation
Force 
feedback
Object stiﬀness
modulation
a
20 mm
Folding-based
prismatic joint
Pouch motor
Inkjet-printed
bending sensor
b
OriRing Three-axis force- 
sensing skin
Initial state
Normal force
Shear force
Fig. 1 | A wearable haptic force-feedback ring with a three-axis force-sensing 
skin. a, We developed a wearable haptic ring, OriRing, which weighs only 18 g 
and generates forces of up to 6.5 N. The design incorporates a folding-based 
prismatic joint, a three-axis force-sensing skin, inkjet-printed bending sensors, 
SPAs and 3D printed ring frames. b, Force-sensing skin consists of an upper 
layer with soft pyramid microstructures, a lower layer with four resistive pixels 
and a spacer separating the two layers. This design enables the detection of 
both normal and shear forces. c, With its multimodal sensing and actuation 
capabilities, OriRing renders the size and stiffness of virtual objects through 
kinaesthetic and proprioceptive feedback. It also allows users to modify 
these properties by sending digital commands, demonstrating bidirectional 
communication with the digital environment.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1236
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
worlds. Equipped with advanced sensors, it captures touch interactions 
and translates them into digital signals, providing kinaesthetic force 
feedback. The device’s single-DoF origami transmission was inten-
tionally selected to facilitate miniaturization, enabling a low-cost, 
lightweight and compact form factor suitable for everyday wear—
such as a ring—without sacrificing performance. OriRing’s three-axis 
force-sensing skin, sensorized folding hinges and high power-density 
pneumatic actuators (see the ‘Overview of the kinaesthetic-feedback 
haptic ring (OriRing)’ section) allow it to deliver force outputs of up to 
6.5 N and weighing only 18 g. This makes it comfortable for continuous 
wear on the finger and establishes it as one of the lightest devices with 
the highest force-to-weight ratio and force-sensing density, outper-
forming existing active kinaesthetic feedback wearable technologies 
(Table 1).
Despite its single-DoF actuation, OriRing supports a wide range of 
tactile interactions, including stiffness and shape rendering and press 
or grasp simulation. Furthermore, the integration of a multiple-DoF 
soft force sensor expands its interaction space by enabling the detec-
tion of both shear and normal forces. By combining rich multimodal 
sensing with a simplified actuation scheme, OriRing demonstrates how 
versatile user interactions can be achieved within a minimal hardware 
footprint. This balance between simplicity and functionality is a central 
design objective of the device.
OriRing consists of several key components: a folding-based 
prismatic joint, a ring frame, SPAs, laser-ablated three-axis 
force-sensing skin and inkjet-printed bending sensors (Fig. 2a). Using 
origami-inspired manufacturing techniques40– 42 allows for compact 
mechanism design, eliminating mechanical friction, enhancing struc-
tural transparency and minimizing assembly requirements.
Actuation is achieved with two pouch motors mounted on oppo-
site base hinges and connected to a shared input pressure source. This 
symmetric configuration enhances the force output and maintains 
balanced actuation. The pouch actuators generate high forces up to 
6.5 N at an input pressure of 150 kPa (Fig. 2b) without requiring gear-
boxes, which often introduce friction and backlash. Their compact and 
lightweight nature makes them ideal for a wearable haptic interface 
that prioritizes both performance and comfort.
In terms of sensing, OriRing offers both position and force-sensing 
capabilities. Modular inkjet-printed bending angle sensors, embed -
ded within the base hinges, measure the vertical displacement of the 
prismatic joint. These sensorized hinges serve dual purposes as both 
pin joints and sensing elements, reducing mechanical complexity and 
enabling further miniaturization. T o improve accuracy, the sensors 
are used in pairs, which helps linearize readings and minimize sensory 
drift. Additionally, the soft multiaxial force-sensing skin, mounted 
on top of the prismatic joint, measures both normal and shear forces 
applied to the OriRing following a one-time calibration process (see 
the ‘Force-sensing skin’s calibration’ section). The performance of the 
sensor in measuring normal forces after calibration is shown in Fig. 2c. 
This three-axis sensing capability allows for the closed-loop control of 
force and stiffness. The ability to detect shear forces along different 
axes enables interaction modalities such as directional swiping, which 
can be used as digital inputs in VR applications.
The OriRing reproduces force, stiffness and shape information 
of virtual objects. A nested closed-loop system, integrating pressure, 
position and force control, modulates both height and stiffness of the 
OriRing (see the ‘Force and stiffness control’ section). This control 
system achieves a pressure and force control bandwidth of 20 Hz and 
3 Hz, respectively (Fig. 2d,e and Extended Data Fig. 1; see the ‘Control-
ler performance’ section). Weighing 18 g (excluding the pneumatic 
control unit), OriRing exemplifies a miniaturized, wearable haptic 
interface designed for kinaesthetic feedback across various virtual 
and augmented reality scenarios.
Three-axis force-sensing skin design
The three-axis force-sensing skin decouples normal and shear forces 
and achieves high sensitivity, linearity and fast response times through 
its design and topology-optimized two-dimensional patterns and 3D 
microstructures. It comprises two distinct layers—top and bottom—
separated by a spacer made of double-sided tape (Fig. 3a). The top 
layer features a hierarchical array of soft micropyramids, engineered 
using rapid laser ablation techniques. The bottom layer is designed with 
four resistive pixels, each incorporating a thin metal strip arranged in 
a serpentine pattern. This 2 × 2 matrix pixel configuration enables the 
identification of the direction of applied force.
Both layers are specifically engineered to enhance the overall 
sensitivity and maintain high linearity and a broad force detection 
range. The spacer between the layers plays a critical role in minimiz -
ing electrical noise generated during the release of applied force, 
thereby improving signal clarity (see the ‘Manufacturing of three-axis 
force-sensing skin’ and ‘Reduction in force-sensing spikes’ sections).
The working principle of the sensor is illustrated in Fig. 3b. When 
a normal force is applied, the micropyramids on the top layer make 
contact with the four resistive elements on the bottom layer, labelled 
as R1, R2, R3 and R4. This contact increases the metal interface area 
between the two layers, resulting in a decrease in electrical resistance 
across all four pixels. When a shear force is applied, acting parallel to 
the sensor’s surface, the compression of the micropyramids shifts 
Table 1 | Comparison of kinaesthetic feedback wearable haptic devices
Device name Placement Actuation method Force sensing Weight (g) Maximum force output 
(N)
Wearable Delta59 Wrist Motor – 1,774 5
Soft Robotic Glove29 Glove Hydraulic – 285 8
SAFE Glove60 Glove Motor One axis 275 10
Two-Fingered Glove61 Glove Pneumatic – 30.8 2.1
HaptGlove62 Glove Pneumatic – 283 22.41
Exo-Glove Poly II63 Glove Cable-driven – 104 10.6
Foldaway30 Handheld Motor – 130 2
DE Glove64 Handheld Dielectric elastomer actuator – 38 7.2
Rutgers Master II65 Handheld Pneumatic – 80 16
ExoTen-Glove66 Glove Twisted string actuation One axis 360 80
OriRing (this work) Finger Pneumatic Three axes 18 6.4
Among these kinaesthetic devices capable of rendering active variable stiffness, OriRing stands out as the lightest device with the highest force-to-weight ratio and force-sensing density, 
outperforming other state-of-the-art devices.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246
 1237
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
progressively across the pixels. For example, a shear force moving 
forward compresses pixels R3 and R4 more than R1 and R2, reducing 
compression on the trailing pixels. This progression allows the sensor 
to determine both magnitude and direction of forces along the x, y and 
z axes. The sensor’s pixel count is intentionally limited to four, simpli-
fying the design and reducing the complexity of data assessment and 
maintaining sufficient resolution for force measurement.
T o optimize the sensor’s performance in terms of sensitivity, lin-
earity and broad-range detection, microstructures are introduced into 
both top and bottom layers of the sensor. Performance optimization 
is achieved by patterning (1) the geometry of the 3D microstructures, 
(2) the conductive layer coating on the microstructures in the top layer 
and (3) the conductive serpentine pattern in the bottom layer.
For (1) above, three types of microstructure geometry are 
explored: flat-topped pyramids, uniform-height pyramids and multi-
height pyramids (Fig. 3c). These geometries are created by adjusting 
the distance between laser scanning lines during the ablation of the 
top layer’s surface. For flat-topped and uniform-height pyramids, the 
scanning distance remains uniform, whereas for multiheight pyra -
mids, a gradient spacing is applied to achieve varying heights. Sensors 
without any patterning on the top and bottom layers exhibit negligible 
resistance changes under applied forces, emphasizing the necessity of 
cases (2) and (3) for enhancing sensor performance.
For (2), the conductive top layer is patterned with square arrays 
of varying densities: 100-square, 400-square and 900-square arrays 
(Fig. 3d). For (3), the areal coverage density of the serpentine conductive 
patterns on the bottom layer is varied (Fig. 3e). Three configurations 
are considered: no patterns, high-density patterns and low-density 
patterns. These iterations are crucial for identifying the optimal pat-
terning parameters to achieve the desired sensor characteristics (see 
the ‘Force-sensing skin’s linear sensitivity optimization’ section).
As the first step of optimization, we use the same multiheight 
pyramid structures as 3D microstructures and test combinations of 
differently patterned top (2) and bottom (3) layers. After identifying 
the optimal pattern combination for achieving the highest linearity 
through force–resistance experiments, we fix this pattern combina -
tion and evaluate different pyramid geometries (1) to determine the 
configuration with the highest linear sensitivity.
The results of the optimization for combinations of (2) and (3) 
are presented in Fig. 3f(i)–(iii) and Extended Data Fig. 2a(i)–(iii), 
which show the changes in relative resistance (R /R0) as a function of 
the applied force. When the bottom layer lacks a pattern, resistance 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
0
2
4
6
8
25 kPa 100 kPa
50 kPa 125 kPa
75 kPa 150 kPa
Force (N)
Displacement (mm)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0
10
20
30
Force, actual
Force, measured
Force (N)
Time (sec)
a
20 mm
Three-axis force-sensing skin
Pouch
motor
Bending 
sensor
Ring frame
Folding-based
prismatic joint
z
x
y
b
d
c
e
10 –1 10 0 10 1 10 2
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Amplitude ratio (kPa/kPa)
Frequency (Hz)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Amplitude ratio (N/N)
Frequency (Hz)
10 –1 10 0 10 1
Fig. 2 | OriRing design and performance overview. a, OriRing exploded view. 
b, OriRing stiffness results under various constant-pouch-pressure inputs. 
It reaches a maximum of 6.5 N at 150-kPa pressure input. c, Three-axis force-
sensing skin’s force measurement performance results. d,e, OriRing’s pressure 
(d) and force (e) control bandwidth test results. Standard deviations (n = 3) are 
indicated as the error bars; however, they are smaller than the marker size in most 
frequency ranges and, thus, not clearly visible.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1238
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
a b
c
e Bottom layer
No patterns (100%) High density (62.5%) Low density (27%)
(i) Flat-topped pyramids
230 µm
(ii) Uniform-height pyramids
CO2  laser
130 µm
(iii) Multiheight pyramids
100 µm
d  Top layer
100-square array
 400-square array
 900-square array
f 
(i) (ii) (iii)
g
R1 R4
R2 R3
z x
y
R1 R4
R2 R3
z x
y
y x
z
Normal force
 Shear force
y x
z
Shear force
x y
z
z x
y
R1 R4
R2 R3
(i) (iii)
(i) (ii)
(ii)
(iii)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.9
1.0
Flat-topped pyramids
Uniform-height pyramids
 Multiheight pyramids
R/R0
Force (N)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.9
1.0
Bottom layer:
 No pattern 
 High density 
 Low density
Force (N)
Top layer:
100-square array
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.9
1.0
Bottom layer:
 No pattern 
 High density 
 Low density
Top layer:
400-square array
Force (N)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.9
1.0
Bottom layer:
 No pattern 
 High density 
 Low density
Force (N)
Top layer:
900-square array
Top layer 
Multiheight pyramids 
with squares metal
Double-sided tape 
as a spacer
Bottom layer
Serpentine electrode 
with four pixels
100 µm
100 µm
CO2  laser
CO2  laser
130 µm 60 µm
R/R0
R/R0
R/R0
Fig. 3 | Three-axis force-sensing skin design. a, The sensor comprises two 
main layers: a top layer with pyramid-like microstructures and a bottom layer 
with four resistive pixels, separated by a spacer. b, Working principle. Under a 
normal force, the pyramids make contact with the bottom layer across all four 
pixels, increasing the contact area and decreasing the resistance in each pixel. 
Under a shear force, the micropyramids on one side are pressed more firmly 
against the bottom layer, allowing the sensor to determine both direction and 
magnitude of the shear force. c , Fabrication of pyramid-like microstructures 
using a laser ablation technique, with three types of fabricated shape shown: 
(i) flat-topped pyramids, (ii) uniform-height pyramids and (iii) multiheight 
pyramids. Three differently coloured circular dots represent microstructures 
of varying heights, with red indicating the tallest and light pink, the shortest. 
d,e, Electrode patterns for the top (d ) and bottom (e) layers, optimized for 
linear sensitivity and a wide measurement range. Scale bars, 200 μm (d ); 5 mm 
e(i); 200 μm e (ii),(iii). f, Force–resistance graphs comparing different top- and 
bottom-layer patterns. The red-highlighted region identifies the 900-square 
array for the top layer and low-density (27%) patterning for the bottom layer as 
optimal, offering high linearity. g , Resistance changes in response to applied 
force for flat-topped, uniform-height and multiheight pyramid structures. The 
blue-highlighted region shows that the multiheight pyramid structures achieve 
the highest linearity. R/R0 is the change in relative resistance as a function of 
the applied force. Resistance was recorded under time-interval-controlled 
loading; overlapping force points from repeated measurements (n  = 5) showed 
a negligible standard deviation (10 −4 , 0.00017–0.00098); therefore, the error 
bars are not shown.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246
 1239
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
changes are negligible, regardless of whether the top layer is patterned 
or not. For the high-density patterned bottom layer, resistance changes 
occur abruptly because the multiheight pyramids contact many of the 
serpentine lines simultaneously when force is applied. By contrast, with 
the low-density patterned bottom layer, resistance changes occur more 
gradually due to the limited points of contact between the multiheight 
pyramids and serpentine lines.
Finally, we optimize the geometry of the microstructures. 
Figure 3g illustrates resistance changes as a function of the applied 
force under optimized conditions: a 900-square array for the top 
layer and low-density patterning (27%) for the bottom layer. The graph 
compares the performance of three different 3D microstructure geom-
etries. Among these, the multiheight pyramids demonstrate the high-
est linearity over the force range from 0 N to 8 N.
On the basis of experimental assessments, the sensor with a top 
layer featuring a 900-square array, a bottom layer with a low-density 
(27%) serpentine pattern and multiheight pyramid geometries is 
identified as the optimal configuration for implementing a three-axis 
force-sensing skin. This configuration achieves a sensitivity of 
–0.0625 kΩ N −1  and a linearity of 0.971 (R 2, linearity parameter) over 
a force range of up to 8 N.
The optimized linear sensitivity of the sensor is critical as it reduces 
the reliance on external algorithms or complex computations for accu-
rate force sensing. Additionally, it ensures consistent force detection 
resolution across the detection range, a key attribute for the develop-
ment of reliable force-feedback haptic interfaces.
The response of the optimized three-axial force-sensing skin to 
normal and shear forces is characterized using a customized experi -
mental setup (Fig. 4 ; see the ‘Force-sensing skin’s characterization 
setup’ section). Figure 4a(i),(ii),b(i),(ii) presents the characterization 
results of the sensor in response to normal forces in the z direction and 
shear forces along the y and z directions.
When a normal force is applied across the four pixels (represented 
by resistance elements R1–R4), a consistent decrease in resistance is 
observed in all four pixels. Similarly, on continuous removal of the 
force, the resistances return to their original values (Fig. 4a(i)). In par-
ticular, for pixel R3, a stepwise decrease in resistance is observed with 
stepwise increases in the applied force, followed by a prompt return 
to the initial value on the complete removal of pressure (Fig. 4a(ii)).
The sensor’s durability and repeatability under repeated 
mechanical loading were evaluated through cyclic tests. As shown in 
Extended Data Fig. 3a, the sensor exhibited consistent responses during 
repeated loading and unloading of normal force across the four pixels. 
Furthermore, long-term stability was demonstrated under a cyclic load 
of 8 N for more than 10,000 cycles, maintaining stable output with 
minimal signal drift (Extended Data Fig. 3b).
Conversely, when a shear force is applied along the x and y direc-
tions on top of the three-axis force-sensing skin, the resistance varies in 
a manner that reflects the force’s direction, with the resistance values of 
each pixel increasing or decreasing accordingly (Fig. 4b(i),(ii)). Initially, 
a normal force applied to the sensor causes a decrease in resistance 
across all pixels, followed by a steady response when the force is held 
constant. Subsequently, as the shear force is applied, the resistances 
of pixels R1 and R2 increase, whereas the resistances of pixels R3 and 
R4 decrease. This behaviour results from the relative differences in 
compression forces caused by the applied shear forces.
The sensor exhibits recovery times of ~12 ms and ~93 ms for soft 
and strong touches, respectively. It can detect forces below 0.05 N, 
which is within the minimum detectable force range for fingertips 
(Extended Data Fig. 4a–c). Furthermore, negligible hysteresis is 
0 20 40 60 80 100
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
R1  Applied force
R2
R3 
R4
Time (s)
R/R 0
R/R 0
R/R 0
R/R 0
0
20
40
60
80
Force (N)
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1.00
1.01
1.02
 R3
3 N
15 N
12 N
9 N
6 N
Time (s)
Load cell
3D rod
Sponge
Sensor
a    Normal force
Initial state
R1 R4
R2 R3
 R3
R1 R4
R2
(ii)
b    Shear force
0 20 40 60
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06  R1  R2  R3  R4
Time (s)
0 20 40 60
0.96
1.00
1.04
1.08
1.12
 R1  R2  R3  R4
Time (s)
R1 R4
R2 R3
R1 R4
R2 R3
R1 R4
R2 R3
R1 R4
R2 R3
+x –xCentre Centre
Fz = 15 N Fz = 0 N
R1 R4
R2 R3
R1 R4
R2 R3
R1 R4
R2 R3
R1 R4
R2 R3
–y +yCentre Centre
Fz = 10 N Fz = 0 N
(i) (ii)
(i)
Load cell
3D rod
Sponge
Sensor
Fig. 4 | Characterization of the three-axis force-sensing skin. a, Photograph of 
the experimental setup for normal force measurement. (i) Resistance changes 
of four pixels when a normal force is applied up to 48 N. (ii) Resistance changes 
of a single pixel (R3) when incremental forces are applied (3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 N). 
b, Experimental setup for shear force measurement. (i),(ii) Resistance changes of 
four pixels when shear force is applied along (i) the +x and –x  axes and (ii) the –y 
and +y axes. The blue-shaded areas indicate when normal forces are applied and 
removed, and the grey-shaded areas indicate when shear forces are applied.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1240
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
observed during the loading and unloading cycles of normal force 
up to 200 N (Extended Data Fig. 4d). These characteristics contrib -
ute to the performance of the three-axis force-sensing skin, which 
features a wide force-sensing range, soft and thin structure, and a 
laser-based fabrication process, outperforming other state-of-the-art 
sensors (Extended Data Table 1). With its ability to detect and decou-
ple three-axis forces with high linearity and sensitivity, the three-axis 
force-sensing skin, when integrated with the OriRing, enables 
closed-loop, high-fidelity force feedback and complex interaction 
capabilities for extended reality applications.
Tactile interaction with extended reality
T o demonstrate the transformation of everyday accessories into smart 
physical interaction devices, we deployed OriRing as a bidirectional 
interface between users and the digital world. Through multiaxial inter-
actions, users can send digital control commands and receive tactile 
feedback, enabling an immersive experience. As a proof of concept, 
we developed a custom VR environment in which a hand avatar grips 
a virtual cuboid between its thumb and index finger (Fig. 5a). OriRing 
renders the cuboid’s height and stiffness (Supplementary Videos 1 
and 2) by translating data from VR into tactile cues, simultaneously 
transmitting user-generated input back to the VR system.
In this setup, OriRing enhances immersion by delivering real-time 
haptic feedback and visual reinforcement. Height data captured by the 
device adjust the virtual hand’s grip, compressing the cuboid and provid-
ing complementary visual cues. Additionally, swipe gestures detected 
by the OriRing’s three-axis force-sensing skin control the cuboid’s prop-
erties: swiping along the x axis adjusts the cuboid’s size, accompanied 
by visual scaling and changes to OriRing’s resting position to simulate 
height changes. Swiping along the y axis modifies the cuboid’s stiff-
ness, reflected by colour saturation changes and immediate updates 
in tactile stiffness feedback. This bidirectional interaction capability 
(demonstrated in Supplementary Video 3) showcases OriRing’s potential 
for the seamless integration of haptic feedback in a small form factor.
T o evaluate OriRing’s performance in rendering virtual object 
stiffness, we conducted a user study focusing on the just-noticeable 
difference in stiffness perception (see the ‘Participants and proto -
col’ section). Participants were tasked with ranking the stiffness of 
virtual objects, assessed through the OriRing. Each trial presented 
three stiffness levels: k  − Δk , k and k + Δk, with the values randomly 
ordered. Subjects were asked to arrange them from the most to the 
least stiff. Five stiffness increments were tested: Δ k = 0.25 N mm−1 , 
0.15 N mm−1 , 0.05 N mm−1 , 0.025 N mm−1  and 0.01 N mm−1 , which were 
centred around a mean stiffness of k = 0.35 N mm−1 . Lower Δk  values 
increased the difficulty of discrimination, with random difficulty levels 
presented per trial.
The results (Fig. 5b) revealed a threshold for stiffness discrimina-
tion: participants struggled to differentiate stiffness levels below a 
certain Δ k of ±0.05 N mm−1 . This threshold is critical for designing effec-
tive force-feedback systems. Additionally, participants showed slightly 
improved performance in their final trials, suggesting a learning effect 
as they become more familiar with the device and task.
OriRing’s ability to convey subtle stiffness variations highlights 
its potential for nuanced tactile interactions in virtual environments. 
Future iterations could further enhance feedback fidelity, enabling 
more precise and immersive haptic experiences. Yet, it should be 
noted that this user study was conducted with a limited number of 
participants (n = 10) and is intended as an initial feasibility assessment. 
A larger and more demographically diverse cohort will be necessary 
in future studies to statistically validate these findings and ensure 
broader generalizability.
Conclusion
We have reported the development of a lightweight and compact haptic 
interface with a three-axis force-sensing skin, fabricated using a sub-
tractive laser ablation technique. The laser-based fabrication process 
provides rapid, maskless patterning of pyramid-like microstructures 
and four resistive extended electrodes, enabling the measurement of 
both normal and shear forces. This method also allows fine control 
over the microstructure geometry by changing the density and gradi-
ent spacing between the lines, leading to tunable linear and nonlinear 
sensitivity. Using this force-sensing skin, we developed a multimodal 
haptic ring (the OriRing) with closed-loop kinaesthetic feedback and 
bidirectional multimodal tactile interaction. The device achieves this 
through a combination of high-power-density SPAs, compact three-axis 
force-sensing skin, bending sensors and a folding-based prismatic 
joint mechanism.
Our force-sensing skin, which is composed of a 2 × 2 array of sens-
ing pixels, effectively detects shear forces along two axes. However, to 
capture more precise and complex tactile interactions, an improved 
spatial resolution is needed. Our laser-based fabrication approach 
offers scalability, enabling higher pixel densities without altering 
the core sensor architecture. This could lead to the development of 
sensors with other tactile capabilities such as pressure distribution, 
contact localization, finer shear direction resolution and multipoint 
contact. However, a higher resolution also introduces technical chal-
lenges. Greater pixel density demands more complex electronics and 
signal processing, which may increase power consumption, introduce 
latency and reduce the overall system bandwidth. Furthermore, denser 
wiring and smaller electrode pads can lead to higher electrical noise 
and mechanical coupling between adjacent pixels, resulting in signal 
crosstalk that can degrade the measurement accuracy, especially 
a b
120
100
80
60
40
20
Success rate (%)
0
0.05 0.025 0.010.25 0.15
Stiﬀness discrimination performance, n = 10
Stiﬀness diﬀerence, ∆k (N mm –1 )
Fig. 5 | Haptic OriRing as a bidirectional tactile interface between users 
and extended reality. a, Custom VR environment in which a hand avatar 
holds a virtual cuboid between its thumb and index finger. OriRing renders 
the cuboid’s height and stiffness. Additionally, swipe gestures detected by 
OriRing’s three-axis force-sensing skin change the cuboid’s properties; swiping 
along the x and y axes adjusts the cuboid’s size and stiffness, respectively. b, We 
conducted a user study examining the just-noticeable difference in stiffness 
perception using the developed VR setup. Participants (n = 10) were asked to 
rank the stiffness of virtual objects. In each trial, they were presented with three 
stiffness levels: k − Δk , k and k + Δk, which were centred around a mean stiffness 
of k = 0.35 N mm−1  and were randomly ordered. The task was to arrange these 
levels from the stiffest to the least stiff. The error bars indicate the mean success 
rate and standard deviation over trials from ten participants for each of the five 
stiffness differences.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246
 1241
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
for weak shear forces. These trade-offs may impact the realism and 
responsiveness of tactile interaction capture.
Our OriRing currently operates as a single-DoF device in terms of 
kinaesthetic feedback. Real-world tactile interactions often involve 
multiple DoFs. Expanding OriRing’s capabilities to support higher DoFs 
without compromising its compact form factor will be a key challenge. 
Achieving this will require further miniaturization of pneumatic com-
ponents and the exploration of alternative compact fluidic pumping 
technologies. Another challenge lies in the integration of a high-DoF 
actuation system with a multiple-DoF tactile sensing skin. This requires 
algorithms to effectively combine proprioceptive feedback from the 
device with tactile input from the sensor skin to produce meaningful 
and reliable interaction interpretations.
Integrating advanced materials and fabrication techniques could 
further improve the robustness, durability and overall performance of 
OriRing. The use of materials with self-healing properties, improved 
wear resistance or adaptive stiffness could enhance the longevity and 
functionality of the device in real-world conditions. OriRing is cur -
rently based on inexpensive materials with high compatibility with 
industrial manufacturing processes suitable for large-scale production 
and commercialization in the future. This scalability and cost-efficiency 
are likely to play a key role in the practical deployment and market 
penetration of wearable technologies.
Currently, the weight, bulkiness and noise of our pneumatic con-
trol unit are limitations. Although the size and weight of the control 
unit could be reduced through optimization, this setup requires an 
external air compressor and, therefore, remains tethered, making it 
unsuitable for fully mobile or wearable applications. Commercially 
available solutions already demonstrate the feasibility of untethered 
operation such as FlowIO 43, an all-inclusive pneumatic control unit 
with a minimum weight of 114 g, enabling wearable use on the body 
or arm. However, FlowIO and similar systems still suffer from noisy 
operation. T o address this, emerging soft and silent pumping tech-
nologies are being explored. These include combustion-powered 44, 
gas-generating chemicals 45, dielectric elastomer 46, piezoelectric 47 
and electrohydrodynamic48 pumps. Although most of these technolo-
gies are still at the research stage, they could reduce noise, increase 
compactness and enable fully integrated soft robotic systems. The 
integration of such novel actuators into future iterations of OriR -
ing could lead to fully untethered, lightweight and silent wearable 
haptic systems.
Methods
Three-axis force-sensing skin
Manufacturing of three-axis force-sensing skin.  The three-axis 
force-sensing skin (Fig. 3a) is composed of two main layers separated 
by a spacer. For the top layer, a soft polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) 
substrate was prepared by mixing PDMS prepolymer (SYLGARD 184A, 
Dow Corning) and a curing agent in a 10:1 weight ratio. The PDMS mix-
ture was then poured onto a master mould with a thickness of 500 μm 
and baked on a hotplate at 100 °C for 20 min. For the formation of 
PDMS-based soft microstructures, a grid pattern of straight lines was 
designed in AutoCAD and fed into the CO 2 laser. The laser ablation 
technique was used to directly induce the formation of a micropyramid 
structure on the PDMS surface. The intervals of the grid pattern are 
varied to achieve three types of pyramid geometry: (1) flat-topped pyra-
mids, (2) uniform-height pyramids and (3) multiheight pyramids. In the 
case of (1) and (2), the density of the grid pattern was varied, whereas in 
the case of (3), the gap between the lines was sequentially increased and 
decreased in a gradient fashion (Fig. 3c(iii) and Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). 
Afterwards, the surface underwent O2 plasma treatment (10 s.c.c.m., 
60 W, 50 s) to enhance adhesion between the PDMS and metal layer. 
T o pattern square-shaped Ti/Au electrodes, a 20-nm Ti layer and a 
50-nm Au layer were deposited onto the 3D PDMS microstructures 
using electron-beam evaporation. Subsequently, an infrared laser 
ablation technique was used to define a 900-square array structure on 
the metal layer for the electrodes. On the other hand, a polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) substrate with laser-patterned metal serpentine 
strips was used as the bottom layer. Initially, PET was cleaned using 
deionized water and isopropanol in an ultrasonicator and then dried. 
Subsequently, an O 2 plasma treatment (10 s.c.c.m., 60 W, 50 s) was 
performed on a PET surface and 20-nm Ti and 50-nm Au were deposited 
on it using electron-beam evaporation to enhance the adhesion of the 
deposited metal onto the PET surface. For the assessment of tunable 
linear sensitivity, the metal was etched in a serpentine fashion with vary-
ing areal density using infrared laser ablation (Extended Data Fig. 5c). 
Finally, a double-sided tape was used as a spacer to assemble both 
top and bottom layers. Extended Data Fig. 5d shows the integrated 
sensor’s photograph.
Force-sensing skin’s linear sensitivity optimization.  T o optimize 
and tune the sensor’s linear sensitivity, three different designs were 
developed for both the top electrode layer on the pyramids and the 
bottom-electrode layer (Fig. 3d,e). The top electrode, consisting of a 
metal layer deposited on PDMS pyramids, was patterned into square 
arrays. The size of the squares varied across samples, resulting in cor-
responding changes in the number of squares in the array. The sequen-
tially designed top electrode patterns include three configurations: a 
100-square array, a 400-square array and a 900-square array (Fig. 3d). 
For the bottom-electrode layer, serpentine patterns with varying areal 
densities of Ti/Au were applied. Three configurations were studied: 
no patterns, high-density patterns (62.5%) and low-density patterns 
(27%) (Fig. 3e). By engineering the electrical contact resistance to the 
externally applied force on the top layer, the linear sensitivity with a 
broad range of detection is adjusted. These electrode patterns were 
fabricated using infrared laser ablation techniques. The laser process-
ing parameters were set as follows: a focal distance of 210.5 mm, power 
of 40%, frequency of 20 kHz, speed of 1,000 mm s−1  and a pulse width of 
4 ns. Detailed dimensions of the serpentine strip patterns are provided 
in Extended Data Fig. 6a,b.
Reduction in force-sensing spikes. T o suppress the electrical spikes 
while characterizing the sensor under dynamic force measurements, 
a spacer is introduced between the top and bottom layers. The top 
layer under pressure with the contact area at the interface between the 
top and bottom layers, with and without the spacer, is schematically 
illustrated in Extended Data Fig. 7a,b. Without a spacer, some contacts 
exist before pressure is applied, meaning the contact between the lay-
ers remains during repeated loadings and unloadings of force. By con-
trast, for the sensor with the spacer in between (Extended Data Fig. 7b 
(right)), the top-layer pyramids are separated from the bottom layer 
without pressure. The electrical response of the sensors with and 
without the spacer subjected to repeated loading and unloading cycles 
are shown in Extended Data Fig. 7c,d. The instability in the electrical 
response (spike-like behaviour) that appears immediately after the 
removal of the applied force is evident in the case of the sensor without 
the spacer (Extended Data Fig. 7c). One possible reason for this behav-
iour could be the viscoelastic properties of the PDMS material, as PDMS 
is a low-viscosity, low-damping material. During compression, PDMS, 
due to its low viscosity, stores energy. When pressure is released, the 
stored energy, and because of low damping, causes it to bounce back 
with a displacement greater than the compression displacement. 
Another possibility could be the high strain during compression at 
which the bounce back is larger. The electrical spike-like behaviour is 
mainly observed immediately after the applied force is removed. By 
contrast, the electrical response is stable under loading and unloading 
cycles in the case of the sensor with a spacer. Owing to the sensor design 
with a spacer, even under repeated loading and unloading cycles, the 
sensor returned to its initial resistance without any detection spikes 
or noise (Extended Data Fig. 7d).
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1242
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Force-sensing skin’s characterization setup. The resistive response 
to the applied normal and shear forces are measured by a Keithley 4200 
SCS connected with an ultimate tensile machine from Mark 10 (model 
ESM303). In Fig. 4, a photograph of the setup depicts the arrangement 
designed for the measurement of both normal force and shear force. 
T o precisely apply these forces to the sensor, custom rods are meticu-
lously fabricated using a 3D printer (PLA, Cubicon 310F). T o ensure an 
even distribution of force across the sensor’s surface, sponge sheets 
are affixed to the 3D printed rods.
Force-sensing skin’s calibration. T o calculate the net normal force, the 
forces applied to each of the four pixels of the sensor must be summed. 
This requires the calibration of each pixel. For this, cyclic forces were 
applied to each pixel of the sensor using a universal testing machine, 
and the applied force versus resistance was recorded. A third-order 
model was fitted for each pixel. These models are used to calculate the 
forces applied to each pixel, which are then summed to determine the 
net normal force applied to the sensor.
T o validate the model, we pressed the centre of the sensor using 
an 18-mm-diameter soft spherical indenter made of Dragon Skin 10, 
simulating a soft finger touching the sensor. We recorded the resistance 
of all four regions and converted them into normal forces using the 
calibration models obtained in the previous step. Finally, we calculated 
the normal force as FN = k(F1 + F2 + F3 + F4), where FN represents the total 
applied force, Fi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) denotes the normal forces applied to the 
four pixels, and k is the correction factor.
Due to gaps between the pixels (Fig. 3f,g), some of the applied 
energy is stored in these regions and is not measured directly. T o 
account for this, we introduced the correction factor k, which adjusts 
the calculated total force to predict the actual applied force accurately. 
This coefficient was determined by fitting the sum of the forces from 
all pixels to the actual normal force. For our fabricated sensor, k was 
found to be 1.6.
Finally, we compared the actual and predicted normal forces 
in Fig. 2c. The error between the actual and estimated forces can be 
attributed to model prediction inaccuracies and plastic deformation 
of the micropyramid structures over time.
Design and manufacturing of inkjet-printed bending sensor
Silver inkjet-printed resistive bending sensors, paired with a compen-
sation approach, have been used in previous work49,50 to estimate the 
angular position of folding joints. This method uses a pair of tension 
and compression sensors, effectively mitigating the common draw -
backs of resistive bending sensors, such as drift, nonlinearity and 
limited durability.
OriRing, designed as a parallel folding-based Sarrus linkage, pro-
vides an ideal host for these sensor pairs. The tension and compression 
sensors are embedded within opposite base hinges, which experience 
identical levels of folding. This configuration allows a compact and 
efficient design.
The sensors are printed on a specially coated, commercially avail-
able PET substrate (Novelle) using a desktop inkjet printer (Epson 
EcoTank) and nanoparticle ink (Novacentrix B25P). After printing, 
the sensors are cured via lamination, as described in refs. 49,50. The 
same PET layer also serves as the folding hinge. T o enhance the sensing 
accuracy and repeatability, we adopted a castellated joint profile for the 
sensor-embedded joints, which constrains folding into a single rotary 
axis and minimizes off-axis deformations. However, this design reduces 
the hinge’s radius of curvature when folded, leading to excessive crack-
ing on the bending sensors over time, eventually causing sensor failure.
T o address this issue, we anchored one side of the bending 
sensor and allowed the other side to slide freely within the origami 
structure (Extended Data Fig. 8). This design accommodates a wider 
bending radius, reducing tension-side cracks and improving the 
sensor’s longevity. The printed sensor design, combined with the 
1-mm-wide castellated profiles, establishes a 15-mm minimum width 
for sensor-embedded links.
For the easy replacement of bending sensors without requiring 
a complete reconstruction of the origami structure, we adopted a 
plug-and-play approach. The fixed end of the printed sensor layer is 
secured to the origami frame on the bottom link using screws. In the 
case of sensor failure, the sensor can simply be unscrewed, slid out 
and replaced with a new one. For seamless electronic connections, we 
use modified FFC connectors tailored to match the bending sensor’s 
footprints. These connectors mechanically clip onto the sensor pads, 
can be easily detached and are reusable. This plug-and-play approach 
saves time, material and energy, aligning with our goal of creating 
efficient and sustainable designs.
The inkjet-printed bending sensors have a resistance of approx-
imately 7 Ω. During bending, the change in resistance is relatively 
small. T o address this, we developed a custom Wheatstone bridge 
with an amplifier circuit, which provides a higher sensing resolution 
and reduces the current consumption. The circuit is designed such 
that the output voltage approaches 3.3 V—the maximum input voltage 
of the OriRing’s microcontroller (T eensy 4.1) analogue input—with 
a small safety margin at the maximum folding angle of 90°. Given 
that the microcontroller’s analogue-to-digital converter has a 10-bit 
resolution, the bending sensor achieves an angular resolution of 
approximately 0.09°.
The longevity of the inkjet-printed bending sensors was proved 
with both cyclic tests (5,000-cycle test with stand-alone sensors, and 
20,000-cycle test with sensors embedded inside the final origami 
structure) and testing the sensor performance after 1-year and 8-month 
periods from their fabrication date (printing and origami embedding). 
Beyond retaining their electrical conductivity, we note that the used 
compensation approach by the tension and compression sensor pair 
enabled the preserved full-scale sensitivity and linearity of the com -
bined signal despite the notable degradation at the individual sensors, 
which would otherwise fail the lifespan test after only few hundreds of 
cyclic loading (widely seen in the class of deformation-based resistive 
sensors). Extended Data Fig. 9 shows the embedded sensor pair per -
formance at 80 and 20,000 cycles, emphasizing the dramatic improve-
ment against deformation-based sensitivity loss.
Overview of the kinaesthetic-feedback haptic ring (OriRing)
The OriRing design comprises a folding-based prismatic joint as the 
primary structural element, embedded soft three-axis force-sensing 
skin and inkjet-printed bending sensors, pouch actuators and 3D 
printed ring frames (Fig. 2a). The prismatic joint is fabricated using 
a layer-by-layer manufacturing technique commonly used in origami 
robotics11. The mechanism consists of two flat parts, forming the top 
and bottom halves of the joint, connected via four rigid outer tiles. This 
configuration keeps the joint in a flat state at rest. Additionally, the 
folding hinges in this setup function as compression springs, pulling 
the prismatic joint back to its flat position when external forces are 
removed. As a result, a single pouch actuator is sufficient to span the 
full range of motion for this one-DoF joint.
The flat origami components are constructed from three layers: 
two rigid laser-machined tiles and a flexible film that serves as folding 
hinges. These layers are bonded using adhesive sheets. For the OriRing 
prototype, we utilized glass fibre (FR4) with a thickness of 0.5 mm for 
the rigid tiles and a Kapton polyimide film with a thickness of 125 μm 
for the flexible layer. The dimensions of the links and hinges were cho-
sen based on the sensor specifications. The central square tiles of the 
top and bottom halves measure 20 × 20 mm2 to provide a full-contact 
base for the force-sensing skin. The side-link width is 20 mm, slightly 
larger than the width of the embedded bending sensors within the base 
hinges. The side-link length, which determines the vertical motion 
range of the OriRing, was set to 15 mm to maximize the range of motion 
and ensuring user comfort when the OriRing is worn on the index finger.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246
 1243
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
In OriRing, we chose to use pneumatic actuation due to its high 
power-to-weight ratio and favourable response speed compared with 
many actuators used in soft robotics, such as shape-memory polymers, 
electroactive polymers, twisted-and-coiled actuators and electromag-
netic systems51– 53. Although pneumatic actuators typically exhibit lower 
power density than hydraulic systems or shape memory alloys54– 56, they 
offer higher actuation bandwidth, which is a critical requirement for 
haptic applications.
The pouch actuators were fabricated using thermoplastic-  
polyurethane-coated fabric and a T eflon sheet, following the method 
outlined in ref. 11. The T eflon sheet was laser cut into the desired shape 
and sandwiched between two thermoplastic polyurethane layers, 
which were heat pressed to bond them. The actuator was then con -
nected to an air tube using an adhesive. Once fabricated, the pouch 
actuator was mounted onto the flat origami structure. For easy replace-
ment in the case of failure, the actuators were secured using screws.
The pouch actuator weighs approximately 0.7 g, excluding the 
pneumatic control system. At an input pressure of 150 kPa, it achieves 
a maximum force of 6.5 N over a displacement of 15 mm, as shown 
in the force characterization experiments. Given that the system 
achieves a force control bandwidth of approximately 3 Hz, the esti -
mated maximum power density is roughly 209 W kg −1 . This value 
falls within the range reported for pneumatic actuators in literature 
(100–1,000 W kg−1 )57.
Energetics of OriRing’s actuation and sensing
The novel laser-ablated force sensor operates at 3.3 V and draws 
approximately 2 mA under no load, increasing to 2.4 mA under a 50-N 
normal force. This results in a power consumption ranging from 6.6 mW 
to 7.9 mW. The inkjet-printed bending sensor operates at 5 V and draws 
between 93 mA and 105 mA at 0° and 90° folding angles, respectively, 
corresponding to a power consumption range from 0.465 W to 0.525 W.
The soft actuator (pouch motor) is driven by two proportional 
valves (inlet and outlet), each operating at 12 V. A single valve draws 
a maximum current of 0.185 A at 100% pulse-width-modulation duty 
cycle. In practice, we activate only one valve at a time—either the inlet 
or the outlet—and keeping the other closed. Therefore, the maximum 
current drawn by the pneumatic control system is 0.185 A, leading to 
a peak power consumption of 2.2 W.
Force and stiffness control
We implemented a closed-loop, proportional–integral–derivative-  
based nested controller to regulate the stiffness of the OriRing. This 
controller modulates pressure, position and force using inputs from 
the bending sensor and the three-axis force-sensing skin to obtain 
the position and applied force data. The controller receives target 
stiffness and height inputs, calculates the desired force based on the 
actual height of the OriRing and determines the required pressure to 
achieve the desired force. All low-level control loops run on the OriR-
ing’s high-performance microcontroller, the T eensy 4.1, which operates 
at a control frequency of 1 kHz.
Pneumatic control setup. The pouch motors are driven by a custom 
pneumatic system comprising a high-speed microcontroller (T eensy 
4.1), two proportional valves (Parker VSO LowPro) attached to a custom 
manifold, two motor drivers (Adafruit DRV8871) for valve actuation 
and a pressure sensor (Honeywell ABPDANN030PGAA5). Along with 
two custom printed circuit boards for the bending and force sensors, a 
voltage regulation circuit and multiple jumper cables, all components 
are enclosed in a custom box measuring 80 × 110 × 70 mm3 (W × L × H), 
which can be worn on the user’s arm and weighs approximately 130 g. 
The T eensy 4.1 executes the pressure control loop at 1 kHz and provides 
10-kHz pulse-width-modulated signals with 12-bit resolution, enabling 
precise control of the proportional valves. The motor drivers convert 
the pulse-width-modulated signals to high-power outputs required 
for the valves. The proportional valves regulate the airflow to and from 
the pouch motors, controlling the internal pressure. The pressure 
sensor provides feedback for closed-loop pressure control. Addition-
ally, a digital pressure regulator ensures a stable supply pressure for 
consistent performance.
Controller performance. We implemented a nested proportional–
integral–derivative controller with anti-windup to manage pressure, 
height and force control of the OriRing. T o evaluate the pressure con-
troller’s performance, we conducted bandwidth tests by applying 
a sinusoidal pressure reference signal and progressively increasing 
its frequency. The frequency was doubled every three cycles. For the 
force controller, we secured the OriRing to a universal testing machine, 
applied a sinusoidal force reference signal and performed a similar 
frequency sweep, doubling the reference frequency every three cycles 
(Extended Data Fig. 1). The results (Fig. 2d,e) indicate that the pressure 
and force controllers achieve a bandwidth of approximately 20 Hz and 
3 Hz, respectively.
Bidirectional tactile interaction with VR using OriRing
The OriRing stimulates the user’s sense of touch, providing haptic 
feedback for immersive interaction. T o enhance the user experience, 
we developed a VR environment that offers complementary visual 
cues. This environment serves three primary purposes: providing 
visual feedback, enabling the user to control the physical parameters 
of the rendered object and acting as an interface for conducting user 
studies to evaluate the performance of the OriRing.
The VR environment was created using the Unity game engine. In 
this virtual world, users interact with a hand avatar holding a virtual 
cuboid between the thumb and index finger. The VR environment 
dynamically mirrors the user’s physical interaction with the OriR -
ing: depressing the OriRing causes the virtual hand to compress the 
cuboid, whereas releasing it restores the cuboid to its original form. 
OriRing haptically renders the cuboid, simulating its physical proper-
ties. Additionally, users can modify the size and stiffness of the cuboid 
through two slider UI elements or by swiping directly on the OriRing’s 
force-sensing skin right/left to adjust the size and up/down to change 
the stiffness (as demonstrated in Supplementary Video 3). This setup 
highlights the multimodal bidirectional interaction capabilities of 
the OriRing.
The OriRing’s microcontroller continuously reads data from the 
bending sensor and the three-axis force-sensing skin. It calculates the 
vertical height of the OriRing, measures the applied normal and shear 
forces, and detects swipe gestures. This information is transmitted via 
serial communication to the computer running the Unity VR environ-
ment. On the basis of the OriRing’s height data, the VR environment 
updates the hand avatar’s interaction with the cuboid. Swipe inputs 
are used to modify the size and stiffness of the cuboid, reflected in 
the slider UI.
The updated size and stiffness parameters are then sent back to the 
OriRing’s microcontroller. These values adjust the OriRing’s height and 
stiffness controllers, allowing the user to feel real-time changes in the 
cuboid’s physical properties. This closed-loop system demonstrates 
the seamless integration of tactile and visual feedback, offering an 
immersive and intuitive user experience.
Participants and protocol
T en volunteers with no known impairments in finger motor skills and 
no prior experience with OriRing participated in the study, which was 
approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee at École Polytech-
nique Fédérale de Lausanne (number 081-2023). Participants provided 
informed consent before starting the experiment. They were seated 
comfortably and wore the OriRing on their index finger, using their 
thumb to apply force and evaluate the stiffness of the virtual objects. 
Each session included five randomized trials across difficulty levels, 
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1244
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
repeated three times per participant. Success rates were recorded for 
each trial, and cumulative scores were shared with participants at the 
end. T o protect privacy, only anonymous participant IDs were recorded.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature 
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data supporting this study’s findings are available via Zenodo at 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14446676 (ref. 58).
Code availability
All codes used for the haptic ring control and simulation are available 
via Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14446676 (ref. 58).
References
1. Shi, Y. & Shen, G. Haptic sensing and feedback techniques toward 
virtual reality. Research 7, 0333 (2024).
2. Tong, Q., Wei, W., Zhang, Y., Xiao, J. & Wang, D. Survey on 
hand-based haptic interaction for virtual reality. IEEE Trans. 
Haptics 16, 154–170 (2023).
3. Dangxiao, W. et al. Haptic display for virtual reality: progress and 
challenges. Virtual Real. Intell. Hardw. 1, 136–162 (2019).
4. Korres, G., Iiyoshi, K. & Eid, M. Origami-inspired vibrotactile 
actuator (OriVib): design and characterization. IEEE Trans. Haptics 
17, 496–502 (2023).
5. Kikkert, S., Sonar, H. A., Freund, P., Paik, J. & Wenderoth, N. 
Hand and face somatotopy shown using MRI-safe vibrotactile 
stimulation with a novel soft pneumatic actuator (SPA)-skin 
interface. NeuroImage 269, 119932 (2023).
6. Sonar, H. A. & Paik, J. Soft pneumatic actuator skin with piezoelectric 
sensors for vibrotactile feedback. Front. Robot. AI 2, 38 (2016).
7. Lee, J., Kim, D., Sul, H. & Ko, S. H. Thermo-haptic materials and 
devices for wearable virtual and augmented reality. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 31, 2007376 (2021).
8. Youn, J.-H. et al. Skin-attached haptic patch for versatile and 
augmented tactile interaction. Sci. Adv. 11, 4839 (2025).
9. Williams, S. R., Suchoski, J. M., Chua, Z. & Okamura, A. M. A 
4-degree-of-freedom parallel origami haptic device for normal, 
shear, and torsion feedback. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 7, 3310–3317 
(2022).
10. Giraud, F. H., Joshi, S. & Paik, J. Haptigami: a fingertip haptic 
interface with vibrotactile and 3-DoF cutaneous force feedback. 
IEEE Trans. Haptics 15, 131–141 (2021).
11. Mete, M., Jeong, H., Wang, W. D. & Paik, J. SORI: a 
softness-rendering interface to unravel the nature of softness 
perception. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 121, 2314901121 (2024).
12. Wang, D., Ohnishi, K. & Xu, W. Multimodal haptic display for virtual 
reality: a survey. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 67, 610–623 (2020).
13. Huang, Y. et al. Recent advances in multi-mode haptic feedback 
technologies towards wearable interfaces. Mater. Today Phys. 22, 
100602 (2022).
14. Yu, X. et al. Skin-integrated wireless haptic interfaces for virtual 
and augmented reality. Nature 575, 473–479 (2019).
15. Frediani, G. & Carpi, F. Tactile display of softness on fingertip. Sci. 
Rep. 10, 20491 (2020).
16. Kim, D. et al. Actuating compact wearable augmented reality 
devices by multifunctional artificial muscle. Nat. Commun. 13, 
4155 (2022).
17. Huang, Y. et al. A skin-integrated multimodal haptic interface for 
immersive tactile feedback. Nat. Electron. 6, 1020–1031 (2023).
18. Kuang, L. et al. A wearable haptic device for the hand with 
interchangeable end-effectors. IEEE Trans. Haptics 17, 129–139 
(2024).
19. Wang, D. et al. Toward whole-hand kinesthetic feedback: a survey 
of force feedback gloves. IEEE Trans. Haptics 12, 189–204 (2018).
20. Pacchierotti, C. et al. Wearable haptic systems for the fingertip 
and the hand: taxonomy, review, and perspectives. IEEE Trans. 
Haptics 10, 580–600 (2017).
21. Srinivasan, M. A. & LaMotte, R. H. in Information Processing in the 
Somatosensory System (eds Franzén, O. & Westman, J.) 59–69 
(Macmillan Education UK, 1991).
22. Hwang, D., Lee, J. & Kim, K. On the design of a miniature haptic 
ring for cutaneous force feedback using shape memory alloy 
actuators. Smart Mater. Struct. 26, 105002 (2017).
23. Gaudeni, C., Meli, L., Jones, L. A. & Prattichizzo, D. Presenting 
surface features using a haptic ring: a psychophysical study on 
relocating vibrotactile feedback. IEEE Trans. Haptics 12, 428–437 
(2019).
24. Talhan, A., Kim, H. & Jeon, S. Tactile ring: multi-mode finger-worn 
soft actuator for rich haptic feedback. IEEE Access 8, 957–966 
(2019).
25. Sun, Z., Zhu, M., Shan, X. & Lee, C. Augmented tactile-perception 
and haptic-feedback rings as human-machine interfaces aiming 
for immersive interactions. Nat. Commun. 13, 5224 (2022).
26. Yin, J., Hinchet, R., Shea, H. & Majidi, C. Wearable soft 
technologies for haptic sensing and feedback. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
31, 2007428 (2021).
27. Pang, X. D., Tan, H. Z. & Durlach, N. I. Manual discrimination 
of force using active finger motion. Percept. Psychophys. 49, 
531–540 (1991).
28. Doerrer, C. & Werthschützky, R. Simulating push-buttons 
using a haptic display: requirements on force resolution and 
force-displacement curve. In Proc. EuroHaptics 41–46 (2002).
29. Polygerinos, P., Wang, Z., Galloway, K. C., Wood, R. J. & Walsh, 
C. J. Soft robotic glove for combined assistance and at-home 
rehabilitation. Robot. Auton. Syst. 73, 135–143 (2015).
30. Mintchev, S., Salerno, M., Cherpillod, A., Scaduto, S. & Paik, J. A 
portable three-degrees-of-freedom force feedback origami robot 
for human–robot interactions. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 584–593 (2019).
31. Yao, K. & Zhuang, Q. Self-decoupling three-axis forces in a simple 
sensor. Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 1431–1432 (2024).
32. Yan, Y., Zermane, A., Pan, J. & Kheddar, A. A soft skin with 
self-decoupled three-axis force-sensing taxels. Nat. Mach. Intell. 
6, 1284–1295 (2024).
33. Tang, R. et al. Flexible pressure sensors with microstructures. 
Nano Sel. 2, 1874–1901 (2021).
34. Shi, Z. et al. Morphological engineering of sensing materials for 
flexible pressure sensors and artificial intelligence applications. 
Nano Micro Lett. 14, 141 (2022).
35. Lee, Y. et al. Flexible ferroelectric sensors with ultrahigh pressure 
sensitivity and linear response over exceptionally broad pressure 
range. ACS Nano 12, 4045–4054 (2018).
36. Bae, G. Y. et al. Linearly and highly pressure-sensitive electronic 
skin based on a bioinspired hierarchical structural array. Adv. 
Mater. 28, 5300–5306 (2016).
37. Tee, B. C.-K. et al. Tunable flexible pressure sensors using 
microstructured elastomer geometries for intuitive electronics. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 24, 5427–5434 (2014).
38. Bai, N. et al. Graded intrafillable architecture-based iontronic 
pressure sensor with ultra-broad-range high sensitivity. Nat. 
Commun. 11, 209 (2020).
39. Zhang, F., Zang, Y., Huang, D., Di, C.-a & Zhu, D. Flexible and 
self-powered temperature–pressure dual-parameter sensors 
using microstructure-frame-supported organic thermoelectric 
materials. Nat. Commun. 6, 8356 (2015).
40. Zhakypov, Z., Mori, K., Hosoda, K. & Paik, J. Designing minimal and 
scalable insect-inspired multi-locomotion millirobots. Nature 571, 
381–386 (2019).
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246
 1245
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
41. Rus, D. & Tolley, M. T. Design, fabrication and control of origami 
robots. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 101–112 (2018).
42. Mete, M., Schüßler, A., Taillades, Y., Trivelli, B. & Paik, J. Data- 
driven kinematic modeling of physical origami robots. Adv. Intell. 
Syst. 7, 2400217 (2024).
43. Shtarbanov, A. FlowIO development platform—the pneumatic 
‘Raspberry Pi’ for soft robotics. In Proc. CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts 479 
(Association for Computing Machinery, 2021).
44. Bartlett, N. W. et al. A 3D-printed, functionally graded soft robot 
powered by combustion. Science 349, 161–165 (2015).
45. Wehner, M. et al. An integrated design and fabrication strategy for 
entirely soft, autonomous robots. Nature 536, 451–455 (2016).
46. Xu, S., Nunez, C. M., Souri, M. & Wood, R. J. A compact DEA-based 
soft peristaltic pump for power and control of fluidic robots.  
Sci. Robot. 8, 4649 (2023).
47. Li, W. et al. A review of recent studies on valve-less piezoelectric 
pumps. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 94, 031502 (2023).
48. Smith, M., Cacucciolo, V. & Shea, H. Fiber pumps for wearable 
fluidic systems. Science 379, 1327–1332 (2023).
49. Türkmen, D. & Kalafat, M. A. Improving inkjet printed flexible 
angle sensor performance by compression–tension sensor pair 
compensation. Sens. Actuators A 345, 113752 (2022).
50. Türkmen, D. & Acer Kalafat, M. Lamination curing method for 
silver nanoparticle inkjet printed flexible electronics: design, 
uncertainty and performance analysis. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. 
Electron. 34, 1949 (2023).
51. Xavier, M. S. et al. Soft pneumatic actuators: a review of design, 
fabrication, modeling, sensing, control and applications. IEEE 
Access 10, 59442–59485 (2022).
52. Jung, Y., Kwon, K., Lee, J. & Ko, S. H. Untethered soft actuators for 
soft standalone robotics. Nat. Commun. 15, 3510 (2024).
53. Liang, W. et al. Comparative study of robotic artificial actuators 
and biological muscle. Adv. Mech. Eng. 12, 1687814020933409 
(2020).
54. Tanaka, Y., Sakama, S., Nakano, K. & Kosodo, H. Comparative 
study on dynamic characteristics of hydraulic, pneumatic and 
electric motors. In Proc. ASME/BATH 2013 Symposium on Fluid 
Power and Motion Control V001T01A037 (ASME, 2013).
55. Pustavrh, J., Hočevar, M., Podržaj, P., Trajkovski, A. & Majdič, F. 
Comparison of hydraulic, pneumatic and electric linear actuation 
systems. Sci. Rep. 13, 20938 (2023).
56. Xiloyannis, M. et al. Soft robotic suits: state of the art, core 
technologies, and open challenges. IEEE Trans. Robot. 38, 
1343–1362 (2021).
57. Greco, C., Kotak, P., Pagnotta, L. & Lamuta, C. The evolution of 
mechanical actuation: from conventional actuators to artificial 
muscles. Int. Mater. Rev. 67, 575–619 (2022).
58. Mete, M. et al. MeTech/haptic-oriring-public. Zenodo  
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14446676 (2024).
59. Laghi, M., Catalano, M. G., Grioli, G. & Bicchi, A. A wearable wrist 
haptic display for motion tracking and force feedback in the 
operational space. Wearable Technol. 2, 5 (2021).
60. Ben-Tzvi, P. & Ma, Z. Sensing and force-feedback exoskeleton 
(safe) robotic glove. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 23, 
992–1002 (2014).
61. Zhang, Y. et al. A two-fingered force feedback glove using soft 
actuators. In Proc. IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS) 186–191 
(IEEE, 2018).
62. Qi, J., Gao, F., Sun, G., Yeo, J. C. & Lim, C. T. HaptGlove—
untethered pneumatic glove for multimode haptic feedback in 
reality–virtuality continuum. Adv. Sci. 10, 2301044 (2023).
63. Kang, B. B., Choi, H., Lee, H. & Cho, K.-J. Exo-Glove Poly II: 
a polymer-based soft wearable robot for the hand with a 
tendon-driven actuation system. Soft Robot. 6, 214–227 (2019).
64. Zhang, R., Kunz, A., Lochmatter, P. & Kovacs, G. Dielectric 
elastomer spring roll actuators for a portable force feedback 
device. In Proc. 14th Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for 
Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems 347–353 (IEEE, 
2006).
65. Bouzit, M., Burdea, G., Popescu, G. & Boian, R. The Rutgers 
Master II—new design force-feedback glove. IEEE/ASME Trans. 
Mechatron. 7, 256–263 (2002).
66. Hosseini, M., Sengül, A., Pane, Y., De Schutter, J. & Bruyninckx, 
H. Exoten-glove: a force-feedback haptic glove based on twisted 
string actuation system. In Proc. IEEE International Symposium on 
Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) 320–327 
(IEEE, 2018).
67. Viry, L. et al. Flexible three-axial force sensor for soft and highly 
sensitive artificial touch. Adv. Mater. 26, 2659–2664 (2014).
68. Aksoy, B. et al. Shielded soft force sensors. Nat. Commun. 13, 
4649 (2022).
69. Lee, H.-K., Chung, J., Chang, S.-I. & Yoon, E. Real-time 
measurement of the three-axis contact force distribution using 
a flexible capacitive polymer tactile sensor. J. Micromech. 
Microeng. 21, 035010 (2011).
70. Suh, W. et al. Shear-pressure decoupling and accurate 
perception of shear directions in ionic sensors by analyzing the 
frequency-dependent ionic behavior. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
15, 51538–51548 (2023).
71. Choi, D. et al. A highly sensitive tactile sensor using a 
pyramid-plug structure for detecting pressure, shear force, and 
torsion. Adv. Mater. Technol. 4, 1800284 (2019).
72. Mu, C. et al. Flexible normal-tangential force sensor with opposite 
resistance responding for highly sensitive artificial skin.  
Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1707503 (2018).
73. Choi, E. et al. Highly sensitive tactile shear sensor using spatially 
digitized contact electrodes. Sensors 19, 1300 (2019).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the BrainLink program funded by the 
Ministry of Science and ICT through the National Research Foundation 
of Korea (RS-2023-00237308) and the Korea Health Technology R&D 
Project through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute 
(KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea 
(grant number HI19C1348). Additional support was provided by the 
National Research Foundation of Korea (RS-2024-00448809), the 
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Türkiye (TÜBİTAK) 
and the Swiss National Center of Competence in Research Robotics 
(NCCR). We extend our sincere thanks to J. Brugger and M. Kiaee from 
The Microsystems Laboratory 1 (LMIS1), École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne, for their invaluable discussions and assistance in the 
development of flexible sensors.
Author contributions
S. Kang, M.M., S. Kim and J.P. conceptualized the research idea and 
conducted the research. M.M. and D.T. built the haptic ring hardware. 
M.M. developed the haptic controller. S. Kang and S.G. designed and 
manufactured the force-sensing skin. D.T. designed and manufactured 
the bending sensor. R.K.J. designed the VR software. M.M., S. Kang and 
R.K.J. conducted the user study and interpreted the results. M.A.K., S. 
Kim and J.P. supervised the project. All authors contributed to writing 
the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41928-025-01515-x.
Nature Electronics | Volume 8 | December 2025 | 1234–1246 1246
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary 
material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Sunkook Kim or Jamie Paik.
Peer review information Nature Electronics thanks Yufeng Chen and 
the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer 
review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner)  
holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing  
agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is 
solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 
2025
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 1 | OriRing bandwidth performance. In each pressure a) and force b) control bandwidth test, a sinusoidal setpoint signal was applied, repeated 
three times with the frequency doubled in each cycle. For pressure control, the setpoint frequency was swept from 0.25 Hz to 64 Hz; for force control, it was swept from 
0.125 Hz to 8 Hz.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Force-resistance graphs comparing each bottom 
and top layer. a) (i) No patterns (100%), (ii) high density (62.5%), and (iii) low 
density (27%) bottom layers combined with top layer patterns of 1-, 100-, 400-, 
and 900-square arrays. R/R0 is the change in relative resistance as a function of 
applied force. Resistance was recorded under time-interval controlled loading; 
overlapping force points from repeated measurements (n=5) showed a negligible 
standard deviation (10−4 , 0.00017 − 0.00098), so error bars are not shown.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Durability and repeatability under cyclic loading. a) Resistance changes of four pixels in response to applied force on the three-axis 
force-sensing skin. b) Resistance change of the sensor during 10,000 cycles of repeated loading, with and without an applied normal force of 8 N. R/R0 is the change in 
relative resistance as a function of applied force.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Recovery time and performance of the three-axis force-sensing skin. a) Response time for a soft touch (0.05 N) is 12 ms, b) Response time for a 
strong touch (40 N) is 93 ms. c) Minimum measurable force of 0.05 N (limited by the load cell). d) Resistance changes during loading and unloading cycles up to  
200 N. R/R0 is the change in relative resistance as a function of applied force.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Fabrication process of the three-axis force-sensing skin. a) PDMS microstructure formation and electrode patterning for the top layer, and b) 
Photograph of the fabricated top layer. c) Deposition and patterning process for the bottom layer. d) Photograph of the assembled sensor.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Detailed dimensions of the electrode patterns on the lower layer for tuning linear sensitivity and force measurement range. a) Square 
serpentine pattern with low density (27%). b) Square serpentine pattern with high density (62.5%).
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Reduction of sensory spikes with spacer. a) Illustration 
of an assembled three-axis force-sensing skin. b) Illustration showing changes in 
contact area under pressure with and without a spacer. c-d) Resistance changes 
under a repetitive application of 12 N normal force at 0.5-second intervals:  
c) Sensory spikes observed in the sensor structure without a spacer, with an 
error rate of 2% (red shaded area). d) Stable recovery without spikes in the sensor 
structure with a spacer, with an error rate of 0.04% (blue shaded area).
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Silver inkjet-printed resistive bending sensor. The 
sensor is fabricated by printing nanoparticle ink onto a PET layer, which is 
then embedded within rigid tiles. When the layer folds, the resistance of the 
conductive ink path changes, allowing it to function as both a sensor and a 
folding hinge. T o mitigate drift and nonlinearity, two sensors are used in a 
tension-compression pair configuration, embedded in opposite base hinges 
of the prismatic joint. One side of each sensor is anchored, while the other side 
slides freely within the origami structure. This design accommodates a larger 
bending radius, minimizing tension-side cracks and enhancing sensor durability.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Performance of the inkjet-printed bending sensor pair at 80 and 20,000 cycles. Thanks to the compression-tension pair compensation 
approach, the resulting combined signal preserved a full-scale sensitivity and nonlinearity throughout the cyclic test despite the degradation at the individual 
compression and tension sensors.
Nature Electronics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-025-01515-x
Extended Data Table 1 | Comparison of multi-axis force sensors
This table compares wearable normal and shear force sensors based on sensing type, spatial resolution, sensing resolution, maximum measurable force, and structural features. Among these 
sensors capable of decoupling force directions, the three-axis force sensing skin exhibits wide force sensing range, soft, thin, and stable structure, simple and flat design, and laser-based 
fabrication process, outperforming other state-of-the-art sensors67–73.
1 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Corresponding author(s): Jamie Paik
Last updated by author(s): Aug 24, 2025
Reporting Summary
Nature Portfolio wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Portfolio policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Data for force sensing skin were collected with a Mark-10 ESM303 universal testing machine and Keithley 4200-SCS,IV measurement system. 
Data for the haptic ring were collected with a Teensy 4.1 board with C++.
Data analysis Data analysis was performed using MATLAB and Excel
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Portfolio guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability 
- For clinical datasets or third party data, please ensure that the statement adheres to our policy 
 
All data supporting this study's findings are available on https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14446676
2 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Research involving human participants, their data, or biological material
Policy information about studies with human participants or human data. See also policy information about sex, gender (identity/presentation), 
and sexual orientation and race, ethnicity and racism.
Reporting on sex and gender Gender or sex data was not collected, as it was not relevant to the scope of this technical feasibility study.
Reporting on race, ethnicity, or 
other socially relevant 
groupings
Information on race or ethnicity was not collected for this study. The work was a preliminary technical feasibility assessment 
of a wearable haptic interface, and participant race or ethnicity was not relevant to the research objectives.
Population characteristics See above
Recruitment The participants were recruited by email as approved by the Ethic Committee.
Ethics oversight EPFL Human Research Ethics Committee approved the study.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences  Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description Quantitative, within-subject, repeated-measures design. Each participant completed five randomized trials per stiffness increment, 
repeated three times. The primary outcome was stiffness discrimination accuracy (Just Noticeable Difference threshold).
Research sample A total of 10  volunteers, undergraduate and graduate students and researchers from EPFL, (aged 22–35 years) participated. This 
sample size was selected as appropriate for a preliminary feasibility study. 
Sampling strategy The 10 subjects were selected randomly among the recipient of a recruitment email sent after approval of the ethical committee. No 
formal power analysis was conducted; the size was deemed sufficient to observe trends and estimate just noticeable difference (JND) 
thresholds.
Data collection Data were collected in a laboratory setting at EPFL. Participants wore OriRing during VR stiffness discrimination tasks; data were 
logged automatically via Unity and Teensy microcontroller.
Timing October 2023-November 2023
Data exclusions No data were excluded from the analysis.
Non-participation No participant dropped out/declined participation.
Randomization Participants were not allocated into experimental groups.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 
3 nature portfolio  |  reporting summaryApril 2023
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Plants
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
Novel plant genotypes Describe the methods by which all novel plant genotypes were produced. This includes those generated by transgenic approaches, 
gene editing, chemical/radiation-based mutagenesis and hybridization. For transgenic lines, describe the transformation method, the 
number of independent lines analyzed and the generation upon which experiments were performed. For gene-edited lines, describe 
the editor used, the endogenous sequence targeted for editing, the targeting guide RNA sequence (if applicable) and how the editor 
was applied.
Seed stocks Report on the source of all seed stocks or other plant material used. If applicable, state the seed stock centre and catalogue number. If 
plant specimens were collected from the field, describe the collection location, date and sampling procedures.
Authentication Describe any authentication procedures for each seed stock used or novel genotype generated. Describe any experiments used to 
assess the effect of a mutation and, where applicable, how potential secondary effects (e.g. second site T-DNA insertions, mosiacism, 
off-target gene editing) were examined.
Plants