AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium
Semina Yi
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California, United States
semina@berkeley.edu
Daragh Byrne
School of Architecture
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United
States
daraghb@andrew.cmu.edu
Dina El-Zanfaly
School of Design
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United
States
delzanfa@andrew.cmu.edu
Figure 1: Presenting AirCraft along with its use in a workshop. (a) rendering of initial AirCraft concepts as a set, (b) brainstorming
wheel, (c) elemental discovery cards, (d) prototyping blocks, (e) participant blowing the brainstorming wheel, (f) participant
explaining idea with the cards, (g) participants trying different air movements through prototyping blocks.
Abstract
Air is essential for all living things and is felt through wind, our
breath, and artificial air currents from fans. Current research sur-
rounding air in interactive systems is limited to pneumatic haptic
technologies, which can result in barriers to creative experimenta-
tion by designers with limited technical expertise which tradition-
ally associated with STEM fields. Additionally, harnessing air as a
design material needs deeper investigation, including the elemental
and instinctive aspects of air that make it an integral part of our
sensory existence and lived experience. In response to these gaps,
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike International 4.0 License.
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1197-8/25/03
https://doi.org/10.1145/3689050.3704932
we created AirCraft, a toolkit to explore the use of air as an ex-
pressive design medium. We deploy and assess this toolkit through
generative design workshops involving designers and makers from
diverse backgrounds. Outcomes showcasing various ideas and shift-
ing perspectives on using air as a design element. We emphasize
the importance of incorporating air into interaction design and
advocate for further exploration of this overlooked material for
design interactions.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → User interface toolkits; User
studies.
Keywords
Air, Toolkits, Research through Design, Haptic Interactions, Em-
bodied Interaction Design, Design Workshop, Tangible Artifacts
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
ACM Reference Format:
Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly. 2025. AirCraft: Exploring
Air as a Design Medium. In Nineteenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’25), March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux
/ Talence, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3689050.3704932
1 Introduction
Air is a critical component for the existence of all living organisms,
including humans. Air is also ubiquitous and omnipresent. Humans,
in particular, reside within the constant flow of air, whether it’s
the natural winds created by nature, the breaths we take, or arti-
ficially generated currents from building systems, such as HVAC.
As we observe the various ways in which air is harnessed, used,
and experienced, it is natural to wonder if these interactions truly
capture the essence of air. Although these applications use specific
characteristics of air, such as lightness [84], buoyancy [9, 74], trans-
parency [7, 9], and abundance, they may not evoke more familiar
facets closely tied to human experience, such as how people feel
the wind brushing against their skin or how they actively engage
with air through activities such as surfing, walking, or skydiving.
It is essential to consider air as a design medium because it en-
ables users to interact with systems without physically touching a
surface, fostering more intuitive and natural experiences that mirror
our interactions with real-world objects [ 29]. Furthermore, inte-
grating air with touch and other input methods creates a richer and
more flexible interaction paradigm, enhancing multimodal systems
that improve accessibility and user satisfaction [16, 23, 38]. Engag-
ing with air also allows for the freeing up of valuable screen-based
interactions, facilitating larger-scale and more complex interactions
without cluttering the interface[43, 54].
Designing active engagements with air has been previously ex-
plored. For example, pneumatic systems have been widely used
in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) because of their ability to
provide tactile feedback and enhance user interaction through the
contained air, such as inflatables. These approaches simulate physi-
cal sensations like pressing buttons or feeling resistance, enabling
the creation of soft and deformable interfaces [24, 26, 36, 67, 81, 88].
Although pneumatic systems rely on additional devices such as
compressors and pumps, they offer extra benefits such as space
efficiency with diverse material combinations. These include in-
creased storage capacity, accessible mobility, and adaptation to
various scenarios while providing safe and flexible material proper-
ties [7, 17]. However, current pneumatic systems heavily rely on
being enclosed with secondary materials, limiting direct interac-
tions between people and the air. Furthermore, we identified a need
for a design approach suitable for designers with less technical
expertise but a stronger focus on interactions and its narratives,
to explore multifaceted aspects of air beyond current technical
approaches.
Using a Research through Design approach, this paper iteratively
investigates air as a design material and the opportunities to realize
approachable designerly toolkits to design sensorial experiences
and interactions with air. Based on these investigations, we describe
the implementation of a toolkit, AirCraft. Our toolkit works to fos-
ter a designer’s sense of air’s potential to extend beyond utilitarian
applications and supports the design of both direct and indirect
encounters with an uncontained flow of air. To examine how it
helps designers view air as a design medium, we deployed AirCraft
in generative design workshops with 12 designers from various
backgrounds. The outcomes illustrate the potential of the toolkit to
inform design practices and how conventions of designed interac-
tions with air can expand to include elemental, instinctive aspects
integral to our sensory existence of air flows.
This paper contributes to an ongoing exploration of air in three
main ways. Firstly, it further illustrates and characterizes opportuni-
ties to design direct interactions with uncontained air. In particular,
our work highlights air as a somaesthetic design material [22, 30, 69]
and its sensorial intimacy, intuitive nature, and intrinsic relevance
to human existence. This contrasts with most applications of air
within HCI where it is most often a secondary consideration in
input-output mechanisms. Secondly, we demonstrate the value of
our toolkit in expanding interaction design practices to the medium
of air flows. Our approach familiarizes designers and makers with
air’s applications in design, and empowers designers of varying
technical backgrounds, to explore a wide range of design concepts
that can leverage and prioritize air’s unique properties in interac-
tion design. The workshop outcomes showcase innovative design
concepts with Aircraft and how designers imagined the versatile
potential of air as a creative and interactive medium, introducing
innovative design concepts created while utilizing AirCraft. Demon-
strating this work and the designerly approaches to air, AirCraft
serves as a catalyst for further design-oriented inquiry into air. We
hope that both the toolkit and the sensorial exploration in this
paper invite further investigation into air as a compelling design
material for interactions.
2 Related Work
2.1 Phenomenology of Air
While air is invisible it is a complex element that can be experienced,
felt, and perceived in multiple and important ways. These experi-
ences stem from variations in its fundamental properties: humidity
[51], and temperature [83, 89]. These can affect our perception of
an environment and its comfort. Studies have shown that most
people will find temperatures above 26.1◦C and relative humidity
of 70-80% uncomfortable, and increased humidity negatively af-
fects thermal acceptability [87]. High ambient air temperature can
also decrease wellbeing [56] and affect perception and emotional
response [11, 18]. In addition to temperature and humidity, air can
flow. The direction and speed of flow (or the absence of flow) are
also important properties of air. Air flows contribute to our per-
ception of space. In particular, and as air flow helps the body to
regulate temperature, air flows have been demonstrated to increase
perceived coolness in hot conditions [ 91]. Although wind speed
and direction can contribute to heat transfer, it is a complex pro-
cess with many other contributing variables including metabolism,
humidity, and body temperature [71].
Additionally, air flows are a medium by which chemical com-
pounds, including for example volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
pollutants and fragrances, are conveyed. The presence of these
compounds can affect the body in a range of ways. VOCs, dust,
pollen and other allergens are carried in air flows and can produce
coughing, irritation, and diminished wellbeing. Air flows, as with
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
perceived coolness, can also increase perceived air quality, espe-
cially if air flow is directed towards the face and when the air is
hot, humid and contains high levels of pollutants [50].
Importantly, air is also a medium that enables two of our primary
senses: hearing and smelling. Sound waves can move through the air
as vibrations that may reach the body and be felt by the skin as touch
or heard by ears. Similarly, air is responsible for carrying fragrances
and smells to the nose. In turn this can provoke strong emotional
responses from pleasant to disgusting. Depending on air flows,
smells may linger or fade. Smells, too, can trigger memory [41, 86]
and transport you to an experience, place, or time in your life. Smells
are “located with reference to source, air currents, and direction
and distance from source” and thus site-specific [60]. Conveyed by
the local microclimates of air and air flow, smells help to define and
enrich the character of a place [60]. This is a partial overview of the
features and effects of air and air flow. Other qualities include air’s
lightness [84], buoyancy [9, 74], transparency [7, 9], and abundance
[5]. These aspects layer and interact with one another in ways that
both enhance air’s interactive potential and make the design of
air-based experience challenging.
2.2 Air in Creative Expression
Some creative works have already experimented with leveraging the
different properties and features of air. For example, architectural
research has explored temperature regulation within air by using
Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) to create dynamic and responsive
installations [52, 89]. Projects like LOTUS 7.0 [65] demonstrate this
approach. Artists like Berndnaut Smilde [6] use humidity to create
indoor artificial clouds, visually representing the presence of air in
space. Within mixed reality technology, incorporating scents into
the air has been used for immersion and sensory experiences of
virtual environments [13, 37]. Scents have also been deployed to
evoke memories [37, 53] and to facilitate communication between
participants. Also, there have been projects involving air quality,
such as creating a visual display of air quality that is interpretable
in different cultural backgrounds [25]. Notably, artists like Michael
Pinsky with his Pollution Pods [59] have pushed these boundaries
further, offering a sensory exploration where visual and olfactory
cues enable people to perceive and interpret air quality in new
ways.
Moreover, people’s lived experiences are also explored by draw-
ing inspiration from cultural traditions involving air manipulation,
such as flying kites, blowing bubbles [ 15, 39, 68], and launching
paper planes, can enrich emotional experiences. By tapping into
familiar interaction cues and evoking nostalgic emotions associ-
ated with these experiences, engagement can be heightened in
interaction design.
Some artists have improved their sources of air by utilizing nat-
ural airflow driven by winds or pressure differentials in the envi-
ronment, such as in a power source or architectural design. For
instance, Alexander Calder’s mobiles [12] and windmills use small
amounts of air to create movement, while Theo Jansen’s moving
sculptures [32] use large-scale air flow, such as sea breeze, to move
larger art pieces. Besides the creative works, wind turbines have
been generating massive energy through natural air flow, and venti-
lation systems in architecture are another way of leveraging the air
in people’s lives. The others have highlighted the practical deploy-
ment aspects of air in their large-scale installation. For example, [7]
and [17] demonstrate the use of inflatable architecture as large as
people could visit inside, offering people an immersive experience of
air’s volumetric and invisible characteristics. This architectural ap-
proach is favored for its ability to minimize sculpture weight while
maximizing volume, enabling ease of shipping, reproduction, de-
ployment, and retraction in various locations. This approach can be
achieved relatively less reliant on digital technology by leveraging
the abundance of air, and most importantly, tapping into people’s
intuitive understanding gained from their daily experiences with
air. Although utilizing the air from the body and environment is
instinctively easy to use, its application has been predominantly
restricted to initiating feedback loops and simplifying the process.
2.3 Air in the I/O Interfaces
There is much potential to leverage air as both input and output
for interactive experiences. Air flows produced by breathing have
been most extensively explored as an input. Breath, a biologically
generated air flow, is symbolic of life, and it has unique poetic ele-
ments. Moreover, as an innate product of the body, breath creates
universal potential for participation in interactive experiences and
installations. For example, in gaming, modified gas masks have
been used to monitor breathing flows and interactively control a
series of games [77]. It has also been used to increase the feeling
of connection, awareness, and empathy between participants and
with nature through breathing synchronization [76]. Additionally,
various projects use breath to craft different modalities of experien-
tial modalities, such as illuminations [1, 62] and atmospheric effects
like mist [51], scaled haptic experiences like Blow Up [8], and Into
the wind [35].
Alternatively, air is also often to create haptic feedback. Haptic
feedback and the embodied sensations it creates, is an important
aspect of many interactive technologies, such as mixed reality, as
they enhance immersion and add realism to immersive experiences.
Multiple haptic systems examine air flow for feedback, for example,
in I/O interfaces [24, 81, 88], fluidic channel embedded wearables
[26, 36, 67], and soft robotics [46, 66, 89]. Current research on air-
induced haptics focuses primarily on pneumatic systems that use
contained or compressed air in sealed pockets, membranes, or inflat-
able materials. These systems often require additional materials like
elastomers and textiles to allow for the expansion and contraction.
However, these materials also create a barrier between air flow and
direct contact, often shifting the focus of interaction toward the
encapsulating materials rather than the enabling air flow itself.
Alternatively, mid-air haptic systems have been gaining popu-
larity. This approach does not require the user’s hand to physically
contact with a surface or material to create interactive feedback.
For example, AiReal created a controllable device that generates
air vortexes and directs them toward a person to create sensations
of virtual objects or to provide interactive feedback. AiReal also
examines the potential to distribute air-based haptic feedback into
the environment [75]. Similarly, other research has demonstrated
the potential for ultrasonic speakers to create more varied patterns
of haptic feedback in mid-air haptic experiences [ 14, 34, 42, 70].
Some researchers have explored the replication of haptic sensation
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
using air as an alternative medium. For example, simulating the
sensation of water flow through air flow enables the creation of
immersive experiences without confining the environment to wet
conditions [64]. However, such haptic experiences are typically
limited to small areas of focus, limiting the interactive potential.
Alternative approaches to harnessing the effects of air for interac-
tion have been explored in fans. Wearable devices [63, 85] simulate
the environmental winds and the temperature of the air, and create
imaginary movement like teleport by creating the airdrag [78] to
offer rich haptic feedback of Virtual Reality (VR) experiences. Addi-
tionally, other projects have used pressure that is created by air flow
to expand possibilities beyond direct interaction with the air itself,
tapping into its inherent impact. For example, wearable devices
such as WindBlaster [ 33] incorporate propellors to create force
feedback. This overcomes spatial limitations of current mounted
devices, allowing users freedom of movement and increasing porta-
bility. However, while on-body devices have potential in immersive
interactions, they also pose limitations. In Extended Reality (XR)
scenarios, achieving comprehensive sensory engagement may re-
quire wearing multiple devices too, resulting in added weight and
ergonomic challenges. These considerations underscore the impor-
tance of balancing innovation with usability in designing immersive
experiences.
Additionally, while these approaches expand our relationship to
air in designed interactions, they require significant expertise to
customize and adapt or are cost-prohibitive for broader use. As a
result, these approaches remain largely inaccessible to artists and
designers to experiment with air as novel material for interactive
systems. Consequently, air as a design material needs additional
investigation.
2.4 Toolkits for Democratizing Design
There are already a small number of toolkits that focus on integrat-
ing air into interactive systems [82, 90], streamlining prototyping
processes [34, 48, 55, 73], and reducing physical module volumes
while maximizing air flow efficiency. Most have focused on enabling
interactions with contained or compressed air through pneumatic
or inflatable systems. For example, FlowIO [ 72] and Pneuduino
[28, 57] offer portable, modular pneumatic solutions that simplify
prototyping, which is particularly beneficial for designers focus-
ing on pneumatic system dynamics. In contrast, the Soft Circuits
Toolkit [80] introduces analog pneumatic systems to aid design-
ers with limited technical expertise, emphasizing soft robotics and
programmable materials over direct air flow interactions. However,
these toolkits were primarily developed for soft robotics and opti-
mizing pneumatic systems. Notably, they do not specifically focus
on designing direct interaction with air, but rather on developing
technology with the assistance of air.
More broadly within HCI, there is a growing interest in creating
toolkits to improve user interaction through versatile and customiz-
able interfaces that cater to diverse creative needs and preferences.
These approaches can offer insights into addressing the constraints
of technology-driven design methods and enhancing accessibility
for designers with limited technical knowledge. Examples of such
toolkits include ThermoPixel [ 79], which empowers novice par-
ticipants to imagine and design personalized affective interfaces,
and ‘It Puts Life into My Creations’ which reduces technological
barriers by creating a toolkit that easily controls the fluids to ex-
plore emerging material, fluid fibers, in expressive display [ 44].
These toolkits typically use modular components, frameworks, and
material libraries, allowing designers and researchers to quickly
prototype and iterate a range of applications [28, 57, 72]. They also
foster participation and collaboration to explore how collaborative
design processes can enhance affordance and accessibility in HCI.
Despite advancements of toolkits in technological supporting
roles, there is also a focus on toolkits designed to support the design
process outside of prototyping sessions. Analog tools like cards
have been widely used because of their cost-efficient, visually com-
prehensive, and portability. Some toolkits like MakerCards [ 47]
assist electronic educational components by allowing remote ac-
cess to information and personalization of learning. Other tools like
Method Cards [3, 92] offer a variety of design methods, activities,
and strategies in concise formats, the Design with Intent Toolkit
[45] incorporates the principles of behavioral psychology and hu-
man behavior into their design processes easily. Also, there is The
Thing From The Future Cards [40], which is designed to stimulate
future scenarios and possibilities in design thinking. The IoT Inven-
tor Toolkit [4, 49] and IoT Service toolkit [21] also utilize the form
of boardgame supporting people to experience the design process
step by step. These analog toolkits are used primarily in workshops
and brainstorming sessions. Common to these approaches is how
the toolkits actively encourage new design concepts and stimulate
creativity with unfamiliar subjects and scenarios.
Our work bridges these areas by developing a toolkit that en-
courages brainstorming ideas for interacting with air, supports
prototyping sessions, and expands the creative potential for design-
ing with direct air interactions.
3 Approach and Early Explorations: Research
through Design
While there have been technical explorations of air in interaction
design, we note a lack of design-focused exploration. To better
understand air as a design medium, we used a Research through
Design (RtD) approach [20, 93] to build an understanding of the
complex nature of air. We did this for three reasons. Firstly to
help identify unexplored aspects of air as inspirational resources;
to involve hands-on design action in order to build engagement
with air as a material. Specifically we aimed to materialize the
invisible aspects and abstract perceptions of air. During the creation
of artifacts, a RtD appproach also encouraged experimentation with
air itself. Finally, these resulting artifacts helped act as tangible
conversation pieces with other researchers, facilitating discussions
Figure 2: Five early exploration participants table including
assigned code, and background.
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
Figure 3: Image of Artifacts in Research through Design Inquiry in early exploration. (a) Basic structure of artifacts (b)
Controllable variables in each artifact: Artifact 1 can change the aperture shape in four different patterns. Artifact 2 can control
the frequency of the sound wave from 10Hz to 40Hz. Artifact 3 has a camera aperture that opens from a diameter of 0.5cm to
2.5cm.
on both the opportunities and challenges of designing with and for
air. This section describes this journey and the insights and how
they informed the design of the AirCraft toolkit.
3.1 Exploration through Artifacts
Within our early work, we sought to move away from the long
traditional of wind-based experiences and realized the need for
new methods beyond conventional fans. During a user study and
expert interviews, participants shared their previous experiences
with air-based projects. Their feedback highlighted that the noise
and mechanical sounds from fans greatly impacted user perception
and emotional responses to air interactions. This line of inquiry led
to the development of artifacts inspired by Aireal’s principles [19]
and operated as mid-air haptic devices. We created three different
prototypes using subwoofers to make the air vibrate (depicted in
Figure 3, Figure 4). The first artifact explores different aperture
formats from a grid of small openings, a small single central opening,
and one or more slits. The second artifact focused on studying the
effect of subwoofer sound frequency, from 10Hz to 40Hz, on air flow
and vibration. The third artifact investigates the use of an aperture
that can be adjusted from 0.5cm in diameter to 2.5cm in diameter.
These artifacts represent our exploration of subwoofer technology
combined with surface forms to manipulate air vibrations, aimed
at enhancing user interaction through controlled sensory stimuli
and customizable tactile feedback.
3.2 Conversation with Artifacts
We conducted a conversational session with five participants (see
Figure 2). Our aim was to understand the relationship between the
patterns controlled by artifacts for two key reasons. First, since
these artifacts allow users to control sensory stimuli that is un-
conventional and without a specific context, we hypothesized that
different airflow patterns could evoke distinct emotional responses,
potentially serving as a parameter for utilizing air. Second, we
wanted to gather users’ insights rather than merely replicating
sensations based on our own interpretations. The study took place
in a quiet room, allowing participants to fully immerse themselves
in the tactile experience for about an hour. Ear protection was avail-
able for those who preferred it; however, only one participant (EP1)
initially tried it but ultimately decided not to continue using it.
Each participant received four emotion cards — happy, relaxed,
angry, and sad — representing the extreme ends of the arousal and
valence spectrum. They were also given blank Emotional Circum-
plex Maps based on Russell’s theory [61] and asked to define each
emotion based on their own subjective experience. After mapping
their emotions, participants engaged with three different artifacts
and were encouraged to think aloud as they mapped the four emo-
tions with each variation in the artifacts using the emotional map
as reference (see Figure 4).
3.3 Findings
Participants were free to associate prototypes and their varied
airflow patterns with emotions. For artifact 2, we observed that
subwoofer frequency often correlated with the arousal level par-
ticipants associated with the arousal on the circumplex map. For
instance, participants who identified anger as the highest arousal
matched this emotion with the highest frequency (40Hz) on the
map. Similarly, participants who mapped happiness as the highest
arousal also associated it with the highest frequency. The aperture
size and frequency showed similar trends in arousal. Smaller aper-
tures were associated with higher arousal, but defining the valence
of the emotion was difficult. An intriguing discovery emerged with
this particular artifact 3, as it proved to be continuously adjustable,
unlike the others with fixed elements. We identified a transition
method that facilitates a digitized and uninterrupted shift between
states, offering insights into valence relationships.
In exploring artifact 1’s various opening patterns, participants
showed a clear preference for two patterns (pattern ii and pattern
iii, depicted in Figure 3), which evoked strong feelings of arousal.
Participants described similar air flows in these patterns based on
their personal experiences. Another notable aspect was that par-
ticipants attributed an emotional response to artifacts 2 & 3, for
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
Figure 4: Images from the early exploration of three artifacts
with the participant: (a) the participant trying different pat-
terns of air on their hands, (b) the participant mapping their
emotional response to each air pattern on the circumplex
map.
example, by describing the prototype as "angry. " In contrast, the
responses to artifact 1 were more personal and reflective, with par-
ticipants expressing their own emotions and making associations
to other experiences, for example, "It reminds me of this... ". This in-
dicates the potential of shaped air flows and crafted mid-air haptics
to evoke bodily experiences and personal associations. However,
these associations are deeply personal so a challenge lies in crafting
apertures and shaped air flows that provide a generally agreeable
experience while allowing room for personalization. Observing the
participants, we saw that the modular opening patterns appeared
easy to interchange. Further, several participants stacked the mod-
ular openings to create an array that crafted unique sensations
and sculpted air flows to their liking. This showed potential to
layer apertures on each other, like building blocks, to create more
complex effects and increased customization.
3.4 Reflection with Experts
To supplement the findings from the user study, we extended the
conversation by gathering input from five professionals and educa-
tors in various design fields. We presented the artifacts and the user
study to the experts and discussed their responses. Initially, our
goal was to measure artifacts and related user study criteria, focus-
ing on interactivity, embodiment, empowerment, and engagement.
However, the discussions naturally evolved into open conversations
about air as a design medium, allowing experts to share their own
perspectives in general. These conversations helped us critically
review and assess the design approach and artifacts and generate
ideas about the toolkit. All interviews were recorded and coded and
we used affinity mapping to organize the data into pre-prepared
categories and new ones, which were then axially coded to explore
relationships and insights. We distilled the conversation and orga-
nized feedback around three keywords: interactivity, embodiment,
and inspiration.
3.4.1 Interactivity. We define interactivity as fostering inherent cu-
riosity and willingness to experiment. E1 and E2 specifically noted
that while the relationship between air and humans is fundamental,
it evolves into a more complex personal relationship. "The feeling
of air caused by someone blowing in my face is entirely different
from the natural breeze flowing from the hill. But you could say in a
physiological sense, the sensation can be very similar, but the story
Figure 5: Design background information of five experts
along with their assigned code.
behind it is incredibly different. (E3)", "Different people represent the
same thing in the same way. (E5)"
The previous associations can be used to play with the expecta-
tions that are observable in everyday scenarios. For instance, the
subtle shift in air flow before a sneeze allows individuals to antic-
ipate this forthcoming event. “I always find that quite interesting
that a sudden movement in the air signals that something is about
to happen. . . . the wind is evidence of something happening; it’s like
that, a clue. . . . the way that air connects you to the future. (E1)" This
predictive nature of air can serve as a connective clue, bridging
individuals to coming occurrences. On the other hand, deviations
from established relationships could reduce the experimental qual-
ity. "Everybody coming into this interaction already has a pre-existing
relationship with air, which is helpful and unhelpful. . . (E1)" There-
fore, balancing this association can provide a unique experience
that inspires diverse approaches to spark curiosity. This highlights
the significance of the design approach in the development of air
as a design medium.
3.4.2 Embodiment. As air transitions from intangible to tangible,
opportunities arise to manipulate its characteristics, enhancing the
embodied experience. However, the sensory experience facilitated
by air is often overlooked. Since our bodies act as both input and
output devices, the embodiment’s control dynamically changes
based on the engaged elements. Participants noted that the artifacts,
particularly, prompted them to imagine various air textures.
Many attempts in the entertainment industry have added multi-
ple modalities and they have often failed to meet expectations. This
was noted as something to avoid. “At movie theaters that, coupled
with some haptic technology, the vibrations are meant to make you
feel (immersed). . . but it takes your imagination out of the movie. . .
these things are to make you feel more authentic, but you’re much
more present in your own body in there. . . the intention is totally dif-
ferent. (E2)" This embodiment is also crucial, particularly because
it integrates real-time elements and fosters a sense of immediate
co-presence in the moment. "When you are adjusting your breath,
you’re responding to its state of change in real-time, taking more
breaths and blowing harder, softer. . . (E2)"
3.4.3 Inspiration. During both early explorations and expert in-
terviews, various ideas that diverged from the original intended
use of the prototyped artifacts were uncovered and shared. "I am
curious whether immersive applications offer a more unique experi-
ence compared to movies. Unlike movies, which are pre-recorded and
can be fast-forwarded or rewound, immersive applications provide a
real-time performance that allows both performers and audiences to
participate in the environment together. (E2)", "What if there is a way
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
to make people perceive air visually? (E4, E3)", "... using your breath
is an exciting thing because you have to get more intimate with the
object, and you have to build a rapport with it to understand how
sensitive it is or how much you want it to change the environmental
effect and to do it without your hands or a screen sort of interesting.
(E1)" This highlights the opportunity to develop a toolkit that can
inspire other designers to explore air as a design medium. Such a
toolkit can broaden and solidify our understanding of air’s charac-
teristics while also fostering curiosity and experimentation. Some
of the ideas and quotes from early exploration, such as humidity,
mist, smoke, memory, and future, are directly utilized in Elemental
Discovery Cards.
4 Design of AirCraft
During user studies and expert interviews, participants enthusi-
astically shared their thoughts, but many struggled to envision
practical implementations of their ideas, particularly when it comes
to unconventional uses of air such as those demonstrated by the
artifacts. Here, we identified opportunities to support the designers
throughout the design process, such as scoping and brainstorm-
ing, and develop the concepts using air as a design medium in
an ideation in the early design process. Also, providing accessible
technical support for harnessing airflow through physical comput-
ing can empower designers to prototype effectively, even without
advanced computational skills. Based on feedback from the early
prototypes, we refined our toolkit goals: to empower designers
to experiment freely with air as a dynamic and expressive design
material. In this, we used the early artifacts as groundwork for a
toolkit, but developed other complimentary materials to help guide
effective brainstorming and prototyping sessions for those unfa-
miliar with air. In particular, we focused on a set of materials that
would help a designer identify and expand the creative possibilities
of direct air interactions. The final toolkit comprises three elements:
a brainstorming wheel, elemental discovery cards, and prototyping
blocks. These are next described.
4.1 Brainstorming Wheel
Previously, all participants mentioned that designing with air is
wildly abstract, and that they need help figuring out where to start.
Figure 6: Brainstorming wheel: (a) design prompts example,
(b) image of a user trying the wheel, blowing breath into it,
(c) structure of the brainstorming wheel.
To help them with the early stages of design, we created the brain-
storming wheel (see Figure 6) as a tool to guide exploration in
air-centric design thinking. Designers must use their own breath
to initiate brainstorming. The wheel contains a propeller, powered
by breath or other air flows, that causes the wheel to spin. The
wheel can land on one of 18 prompts covering various aspects of
air. Each prompt includes the types and transitions of air, users,
locations, and characteristics of air that they should initially de-
sign with (ex. Design an experience centered around ‘Flow of air’
where ‘Two people’ interact ‘Outdoor’ controlled ‘Gently’ while
also incorporating ‘Heat’). The goal with this approach is to reduce
the complexity of the design space by introducing some up-front
constraints. Each blow of the wheel allows a designer to iteratively
become familiar with a subset of the features of designing with air.
By constraining the design space in this way, our goal is to offer
designers familiar requirements in the design process so they can
adapt systematic thinking while navigating the complexities of air
as a design medium.
4.2 Elemental Discovery Cards
Understanding the nature and complexities of materials is crucial for
any design process to provide insight into what is possible and what
limitations exist. The unique properties of materials often guide
design and inspire concepts. Consequently, we prepared Elemental
Discovery Cards (see Figure 7, Appendix A.2) to provide this insight.
Each card summarizes a specific design factor for air and the cards
are organized into eight distinct categories:
• Source type: Flow, Oscillation
• Transition: Digital, Analog
• Direction: Rotation, North-East-West-South, Transfer
• Movement: Mount, Wheel, Wearable, Portable
• Magnitude: Breath, Breeze, Moderate, Fresh, Strong
• Repeatability: Count, Time
• Period: Second, Minutes, Hours, Irregular
• Mediation: Humidity, Scent, Heat, Mobility, Future, Memory
Individually and collectively, the cards offer insights into concep-
tual aspects of air and inform considerations for designing devices
Figure 7: Elemental discovery cards: (a) example of cards
front and back side, (b) user looking at the card, (c) example
of cards
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
Figure 8: Prototyping blocks: (a) overview of modular block
units, (b) interchangeable opening patterns, (c) magnetic con-
nection for easy assembly, (d) photo from the generative
design workshop showcasing the direct use of prototypes
that leverage air interactions. The details of the cards can be found
in the appendix A. These cards serve as educational tools to enhance
designers’ understanding for air’s potential. For example, the cards
pair with the prompts on the brainstorming wheel, and provide
context to interpret the prompts. In this way, they also work to
inspire creativity and guide exploration by presenting possibilities
beyond conventional notions of air.
4.3 Prototyping Blocks
Using the previous two elements of the toolkit, end users can arrive
at a concept for air-based interactions. The final element of the
toolkit, the prototyping blocks, allows rapid enactments of these
concepts. While air interactions can be enacted with a range of
materials — from waving paper or sheets to create air flows or
mocking up pin wheels or kites to capture air, concepts that re-
quire electromechanical control can pose significant challenges and
barriers for designerly engagement.
Our prototyping blocks (see Figure 8, Figure 9) address these
challenges and cater to a broader audience who might be unfa-
miliar with physical computing or have low technical expertise.
Our prototyping blocks offer six fundamental physical computing
elements for prototyping with air that can be quickly related to one
another, recomposed, and organized into a working prototype. The
six elements are comprised of:
• Main (core): A block containing a SEEED Studio XIAO SAMD21
board used for control and coordination between compo-
nents.
• Battery (power): A power pack to provide DC current to all
components.
• Subwoofer (output): A subwoofer speaker to create mid-
air haptic sensations through varied frequency ranges. The
block comes with interchangeable apertures that can be
placed on top to change and shape air flows. The subwoofer
block includes a dial to adjust the frequency range.
• Fan (output): A 5V DC motor with custom 3D printed fan
blades.
• Dial (control): A 10k Ohm rotary potentiometer to adjust the
amplitude of the subwoofer and/or the speed of the fan.
• Button (control): Turn on and off power to the outputs.
These blocks are connected using snap-fit magnetic connectors,
which transfer power and signals between blocks. This design al-
lows air interactions to be prototyped without requiring additional
code or computing. Thus, these blocks allow for easy experimenta-
tion with different air sources and control mechanisms. The initial
version of the blocks focuses on designing air flows as outputs, but
it provides an extensible platform that can be adapted to include
breath sensing, anemometers to monitor wind and other air flows,
and other forms of output.
5 Generative Design Workshop
In the interaction design research [2, 27, 31], the generative design
phase encourages participants to produce a broad range of ideas
while emphasizing creative exploration. In our study, we employed
storyboarding and prototyping techniques during this generative
design process. As noted above, the goal for our toolkit was to
empower designers to experiment with air as a design material.
To evaluate how the toolkit operated in design activities and to-
wards these goals, we organized a generative design workshop. Our
research questions are as follows:
(1) How can design workshops, that use the accompanying
toolkit, foster the understanding of air as a design material
and help participants generate diverse ideas and possibilities
for interaction with air?
(2) How can individuals, and in particular designers with di-
verse backgrounds, including limited technical expertise,
comprehend and utilize the toolkit for manipulating air?
Additionally, we sought to evaluate participants’ perceptions of
the toolkit’s ease of use, efficiency, intuitiveness, and overall expe-
rience to improve the current version of AirCraft. We conducted
debriefing interviews to identify any challenges or pain points en-
countered by users and to explore opportunities for refining the
toolkit.
5.1 Workshop Procedure
The workshop was structured to generate and prototype air-based
interactions and was organized into two phases: conceptualization
through storyboarding, and prototyping interactions. Before the
workshop, participants were informed that their task was to gener-
ate design interaction ideas centered around air as the main theme.
Activities took place over a 90-minute session, during which partic-
ipants worked in pairs to help foster collaborative conversations
about air as a design medium and to facilitate cooperative sense-
making. The toolkit was presented at the assigned session to ensure
that their use did not bias the original ideas, but fostering creativity
without influencing their initial concepts.
During the first phase, participants were introduced to the brain-
storming wheel. They were also provided with storyboard templates
(see appendix and Figure 12 a) to capture generated ideas. Each
participant was invited to sketch out one or more ideas using the
storyboard templates. As they developed these concepts, partici-
pants were encouraged to think aloud and discuss their ideas with
the other participants. In the second phase, they were introduced
to the prototyping blocks and given prototype templates (see ap-
pendix and Figure 12 b) as well as basic art supplies — such as hot
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
Figure 9: The table presents six elements of prototyping blocks: 1 Core, 1 Power, 2 Output, 2 Control, and modular tops.
glue, cardboard, colored pencils, masking tape, scissors, knives, and
cutting mats — to create physical models and mockups. The ele-
mental discovery cards were introduced at different phases. They
were presented during the first batch of participants during the first
phase and later participants in the second phase. This change was
made in response to feedback from earlier participants, who found
the introduction of cards overwhelmed the amount of information
they conveyed.
The workshop included facilitated sharing and reflection periods
after each phase. This also allowed for participants to discuss and
provide feedback on each other’s ideas, and contribute to the devel-
opment of additional design possibilities. Finally, post-workshop
surveys and interviews were conducted to gather insights for im-
provement.
5.2 Participants
Twelve participants in their late twenties to thirties (ten female
and two male) were recruited (see Figure 11). Recruitment was
conducted through campus bulletin board posters and email distri-
bution lists. Participants worked in pairs during the workshop; six
two-person workshops were held. In pairing participants, we bal-
anced random assignment with creating pairs with different design
and technical backgrounds; adjusting initial random assignments
as needed. Participants received a 15-dollar gift card as a reward.
The study’s objectives and tasks were briefly explained upon en-
rollment, however, the details of the toolkit were not introduced
initially, until pre-study activities were completed. At the begin-
ning and end of the workshop, participants were asked to provide
their thoughts on using air as a design medium. This was used for
comparison.
5.3 Data Analysis
Storyboards were collected and prototypes documented. To exam-
ine and assess the variety of ideas generated, outcomes were an-
notated using five described categories: forms of input and output;
purpose; scale; modality; and how the air was created (or employed)
in the system. Additionally, we analyzed the audio recordings from
workshop discussions and reflections, as well as the final interviews.
This analysis focused on understanding if and how participants
changed their perception and understanding of designing with air
as a result of the AirCraft. We then coded the data openly and
axially to identify categories of insight. Two recurrent and key con-
cepts identified were: access, which refers to allowing users with
limited technical literacy to design easily; playfulness, often closely
associated with people’s perceptions of difficulty and showing the
reduction of their mental obstacles. Finally, the System Usability
Scale [10] was administered during workshop sessions to evaluate
the toolkit’s usability. We used this survey to gauge user percep-
tions of ease of use, efficiency, intuitiveness, and overall experience
with the toolkit. This was used, in combination with the debriefing
interview to identify challenges or pain points, explore avenues for
enhancing the toolkit, and uncover opportunities for iteration and
improvement in user experience.
6 Findings
6.1 Workshop Outcomes: Approaching Air In
Interactive Scenarios
During the workshop, a diverse range of ideas emerged. These are
provided in detail in Appendix B and summarized in Figure 13.
Participants created a total of 31 storyboards (2-3 per person) and
at least one interactive prototype based on the storyboards (with 2
participants creating two prototypes). The ideas showcasing uses
of air not limited to the electrical pneumatic systems. For example,
P5 designed an electric-free sensor system that collects information
about people passing through a door by sensing the magnitude and
direction of air movement caused by the doors’ opening and closing.
P11’s concept enabled two people connecting through scents. They
blow air into the device to create a sensory experience that encour-
ages memory recall and conversation. The design of P3 aims to
simulate a breeze by tapping the curtains, using sound and visuals,
without actual weather conditions. Ten participants (P1, P2, P3, P6,
P7, P8, P9, P10, P11, P12) thought of using air as a part of the out-
put system such as puffing the air to draw patterns on the surface
of water (P8), or creating tactile weather information (P6). There
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
Figure 10: Images from the generative design workshop: (a) a participant using a brainstorming wheel to receive the design
prompt. (b) Participants engaged in active discussion during the workshop. (c, d) a Participant explaining the final prototype.
Figure 11: Twelve generative design workshop participants table including assigned code, design experience, background, and
physical computing skill level.
were six different ways of utilizing air in input sensor, for example
utilizing their breath to transmit the emotional states and presence
(P9), or leveraging the direction of air flow from the motion of a
door opening or closing to get the information of visitors who pass
through the door, indicating whether they are coming in or going
out, and how many visitors are passing (P5).
Furthermore, there were concepts where air served as both input
and output. For example, P1 imagined capturing air movement and
bubbles through body movement, and P11 utilized the blowing air
to initiate an air puff of a scent to encourage memory recall and
conversation. P3 designed a device that replicates sensations per-
ceived through the air, providing a similar experience for designers
without actual air, and P5 made a sensor to detect the number and
direction of people to pass through the gate.
In terms of purpose, these concepts ranged from practical ap-
plications, pure enjoyment of the air itself, to exploring new and
alternative ways of communicating their emotions or current states
to others. Some ideas aimed to enhance existing interactive systems,
while others focused on reveling in the elemental qualities of air.
Notably, participants leveraged not only tactile sensory feedback
but also incorporated sounds and visual information to amplify the
impact of air. Participants, also started exploring ways to evoke
memories and build emotional connections between people. Inter-
estingly, the power sources utilized to harness air varied among
the ideas. Some relied on physical computing elements, while oth-
ers explored alternative methods, such as environmental wind or
bodily movement.
6.2 Perception Change Towards Air
“Design using air. That’s really abstract. I have no idea how should I
start with when hearing that kind of idea.(P1)" While the concept
of using air as a design element fascinated participants, it was
also a new concept to them. Our survey indicated that prior to
the workshop, more than nine participants felt unsure or unclear
how to design for air (P1, P2, P3, P6, P7, P9, P10, P11, P12). They
additionally had no preliminary ideas about what or how they
would create air-based interactions, even with knowledge of the
focus of the workshop. Analysis of the workshop transcripts and
debriefing interviews characterized how their perception of air’s
potential as a design material developed through engagements with
AirCraft. This evolved positively, shifting from initial feelings of
uncertainty of how to design with air (P6, P9, P10, P11) or air as
abstract material (P1, P2, P3, P7, P12) to a newfound appreciation
for its nature and opportunities for design. P1, P2, and P9 reflected
on these changes: “I never really considered air as a design medium,
but after the workshop, I realized how important it is as an element
surrounding us and how it affects our experience and interaction. I
also think there are challenges arising from this unfamiliarity, such
as understanding the flow and rhythm, as well as finding materials
that work well with air. (P9)".
Participants also appreciated the ability to engage air as it is a
natural material and readily available in their surroundings. They
also recognized the need for considering related factors, weather,
and environmental conditions like humidity, heat, scent, and sea-
sonal changes (P3, P6, P7, P9, P11). In addition, several participants
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
Figure 12: Storyboard and prototype example works from the generative design workshop. Storyboard from left to right (P5,
P10, P3), and prototype from left to right (P10, P1, P2). see Figure 18 in appendix.
explored how air might evoke memories, and simulate recalled
experiences (P2, P3, P5, P6, P11). They noted how these concepts
added increased depth to air interactions, making some prototypes
more culturally-relevant and intimate. “[Air] is always everywhere
and related to many situations, but there are still not many design
ideas compared to other natural sources. (P5)", “The air contains lots of
information that we didn’t even realize. If we have more approaches
that capture different attributes of air, then there is much more po-
tential. (P10)", “I tried to echo a lot in my memory about when I can
feel the air when I can interact with the air, and when I have a really
strong connection with the seasons. Also, about some romantic or
interesting moments in your daily life and how we can feel in the air.
So as more about memory. (P2)"
6.3 Time Matters
In addition to exploring the ways the tools inspired understanding
of air, we explored how and when the tools were introduced to
participants. We were interested in the sequencing of activities,
design materials and the implications for how they guided design
directions. As noted earlier, in early workshop sessions, a few par-
ticipants mentioned the challenge of effectively using the cards,
citing two specific issues. Firstly, two participants expressed feeling
overwhelmed by the sheer volume of cards, even though they found
the categorized structure more helpful than individual cards.“It’s
a little bit difficult to work with because there are so many things. I
feel like I have no idea where to start with picking the ideas, because
there are so many combinations here. (P6)"
Alternatively, two participants mentioned that it could have
been preferable if the cards had been introduced in the earlier
session, brainstorming, and storyboarding. “I feel like this should be
introduced at the very beginning. So we can get a good understanding
of the characteristics that this media has. (P4)" “When I selected which
prototype to create, I already had some ideas. So, when I saw the cards
afterward, I felt that maybe they didn’t really help me. (P5)"
This perspective is important because it addresses the challenge
of participants feeling overwhelmed by too much information early
in the design process. Conversely, introducing the cards too late
can make it seem irrelevant, as participants may be already too
commited to a design direction for the cards to inform and guide
ideation. To examine this issue, we altered the timing of when the
cards were introduced in the workshop. From feedback, we deter-
mined that the optimal moment to introduce the cards is midway
through the brainstorming session, rather than with the brainstorm-
ing wheel or in the prototyping session. This moment allowed par-
ticipants to begin brainstorming with the prompts from the wheel,
and then use the cards when they encounter difficulties expand-
ing their ideas on the storyboard. Feedback from later workshop
participants indicated that this adjustment eliminated any sense of
disconnect between the tool and the brainstorming process.“I think
the cards were introduced at the right time. It was after the prompt,
so it wasn’t all at once. It was nice to get started just with the prompt.
As I started thinking, I got stuck a little bit, and then you introduced
the cards. So the words in the cards, again, helped to get out of that
being stuck a little bit. (P2)" .
The participant (P2) presented the card labeled ’transfer’ under
direction category and described how the diagram of two interact-
ing circles inspired her/him to envision people dancing together,
with the air moving around them as they spin. Additionally, the
participant developed three different scales of interaction, ranging
from a hand-held object to full-body size clothing, emphasizing
the concept of transferring experiences across these varying scales.
This shows that the visual information on the elemental discovery
cards allowed the improvisational ability beyond original intention.
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
Figure 13: Table of participants’ final prototype concepts from the generative design workshop and its analysis under five
categories: input/output, purpose, scale, modality, and source of air.
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
6.4 Toolkits Usability Evaluation
All items in the toolkit scored above 68 on the System Usability
Scale, indicating good usability, but with room for improvement.
6.4.1 Brainstorming Wheel. The brainstorming wheel scored 76.59
and it was generally found to be helpful in grasping abstract ideas
related to designing with air and served as a good starting point for
ideation. Its playful nature fostered an exploratory atmosphere dur-
ing workshops, promoting, on occasion, both laughter and bodily
movement. “It’s interesting as it adds some kind of randomness based
on my own body interaction. It’s like a lottery to get something to
brainstorm with. (P3)", “The initial five words when we spin a wheel,
and also all those cards that provide extra attributes on how we think
of air...(P10)", “Getting the prompt was helpful in starting to think
about it. (P11)".
6.4.2 Elemental Discovery Cards. The elemental discovery cards
scored 76.79, which was the highest score among all the tools.
The information on the cards was key to both building insight
around the designing for air and sparking creative approaches
among participants: “When you showed these cards, I said wow.
Air can have many different characteristics, and there are so many
directions that designers can take. It really expands my imagination
and my understanding of the air, because I never thought of there
being so many different categories and different aspects of air. (P2)",
“I read some words on the cards and that helped trigger ideas. (P11)",
“The cards help me understand the elements I’m working with. (P9)"
Additionally, some participants referenced the elemental discovery
cards to develop their concepts after completing their storyboards.
P4 discussed this relative to the addition of ideas for wearable
interventions inspired by information from the cards. “This transfer
card really helped me, actually the diagram of it. I interpreted this
diagram as two people spinning their bodies. ... I don’t think I could
come up with this concept without the card. This was super helpful.
(P2)", “I am more of a visual person, so I am definitely sensitive to
visuals and rely on images when brainstorming. Icons also help me
with brainstorming. The cards were really helpful for me to consider
the type of interactions or experiences I want to create. (P4)"
6.4.3 Prototyping Blocks. The prototyping blocks just met the crite-
ria for usable systems, with a score of 69.77, indicating a significant
need for improvement. While there were shortcomings, neverthe-
less, participants saw valued in the blocks ability to quickly mock
up air interactions. They valued the prototype blocks’ modular and
expandable nature, which facilitated the quick creation of sketch
models and experimentation with effects.“I really enjoyed the modu-
lar and expandable architecture of the prototype. (P1)", “It just inspires
me to think, ’Hey, what can I build with this?’ in different ways. (P7)"
Similarly, other participants also pointed out that translating con-
cepts into prototyped sensory experiences was important to their
understanding. They talked about how exploring air-related con-
cepts through rapid prototyping can have a transformative impact
on how the interpret the concepts. Participants shared also how di-
rectly engaging with air through block-based prototyping expanded
their imagination, and helped them to develop their own concep-
tual frameworks for working with air. “I never saw the block like
this. I could do something creative with these that could potentially
change the way we experience and interact with air. So it definitely
helped me to open up my imagination about air. (P4)", “[Because of
the blocks,] It was easy to understand the different texture of air and
to get inspiration about air. (P5)"
7 Discussion
We identified two distinct ways in which participants interact with
AirCraft. First, they use it as intended, leveraging AirCraft to guide
their design processes. Second, participants used it as a commu-
nication tool. This not only influenced design practices but also
inspired perspectives resulting in diverse design concepts from the
generative design workshop. We recognized this achievement by
embracing the Research through Design approaches in both earlier
exploration and designing of the workshops.
7.1 Toolkit that prioritizes Designing
Interactions
AirCraft prioritizes its interactive potential and explores the role of
air in interactions from designerly perspectives. This contrasts with
the majority of existing toolkits that focus on adopting, learning and
utilizing technical approaches, and specifically pneumatic systems
[28, 57, 72, 80]. While these toolkits facilitate engagement with
underlying technologies and simplify complex systems that enable
interactions, the current toolkits’ main emphasis has been on soft
robotics and activating inflatables with air, offering convenient
ways to manipulate air flow using pumps and valves, considering
air as a secondary material.
Previous HCI research suggested developing the technology be-
fore considering the applications [19, 72]. However, AirCraft users
engage with the tool through a design approach that deeply ex-
plores the characteristics of air and its interaction with humans
in the early stages of the design process. As illustrated by our
findings, AirCraft cultivates designerly exploration of air and the
possibilities for interaction through approachable formats for both
conceptualization of interactive possibilities and rapid prototyping.
The former sensitizes a designer to the possibilities for air while
the latter affords a designer a direct sensorial encounter with their
concept. By bridging the gap between creative and technical ap-
proaches, AirCraft encourages a wider range of ideas and concepts
that extend beyond technical skills.
7.2 Expanding The Role Of Toolkits From
Guidance To Communication
We noticed that participants used the toolkit to facilitate conver-
sations about air-based interactions. It is not atypical for toolkits
to promote conversations and many other toolkits have fostered
conversations between different stakeholders towards new insights
[31, 58]. We noticed that participants use AirCraft in a slightly dif-
ferent way. For example, the brainstorming wheel, which involves
embodied interaction through breath, added a playful element and
helped participants recognize and reflect on the differences in their
breathing activities. This led to an exchange of thoughts and per-
sonal experiences related to breathing or other similar activities
that produced or circulated air. Additionally, the abstract and broad
terminology of the elemental discovery cards allowed for diverse in-
terpretations and encouraged open conversation and sensemaking
among participants. This was the distinctive role of the elemental
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
discovery cards in the design process compared to some existing
toolkit cards that were more focused on guiding the design pro-
cess [3, 45]. We were also surprised to find that prototyping blocks,
despite not initially being considered a communication tool, were
used by some participants to illustrate their ideas, even though
they did not integrate them directly into their designs. These ob-
servations suggest future developments for AirCraft and ways to
broaden its audience and functionality.
7.3 Toolkit Evaluation and Future Improvement
We created a toolkit to aid the designerly engagement with air,
through scaffolded brainstorming and prototyping, and exploration
of the potential of air as a design medium. In the future, the AirCraft
could be further refined, in particular, the prototyping blocks. While
participants acknowledged the potential of the prototyping blocks,
the usability score was in the borderline range, highlighting the
need for improvements. Contributing factors included insufficient
airflow strength and control. Additionally, the lack of input sensors
for air and missing features from the elemental discovery cards,
such as scent and humidity, may have lowered user expectations.
Expanding the blocks to incorporate input sensors and additional
functionalities could enhance their applicability and scalability,
facilitating a broader exploration of air’s unique properties in both
prototyping and exploratory design phases.
Similarly, the addition of a graphical interface for programming
the block prototypes would help toolkit users explore and customize
a greater range of scenarios and experiences. Building on the feed-
back from the generative design workshop, we created the concept
for a computational tool (Figure 14) that caters to advanced users
allowing them to create advanced immersive experiences with the
physical blocks. The tool has a user interface that resembles a fa-
miliar turntable, making navigation intuitive. Each element’s shape
signifies the type of air source, and its size denotes magnitude. Ad-
ditionally, the duration of air interactions is adjustable via a slider,
providing further customization. Users can simply drop elements
onto the turntable-like circle within the tool’s interface, where they
rotate to reveal the repetition period of multiple interactions. Rings
can be added to accommodate multiple blocks, facilitating complex
designs. As elements pass the needle, they trigger the programmed
air interactions, seamlessly connecting the digital and analog as-
pects of the interaction. We plan to integrate this tool into the
toolkit in the next phase.
Furthermore, we recognize that the small sample size of 12 par-
ticipants in the generative design workshop, along with the short
duration of the study, limits the findings and restricts generalizabil-
ity within a controlled environment. Increasing the sample size and
monitoring longer-term, real-world design projects would enhance
the measurement of the AirCraft’s effectiveness.
7.4 Exploring Overlooked Mediums
In our early exploration and generative design workshops, con-
ducted under a Research through Design (RtD) approach [20, 93, 94],
conversation and discussion played a crucial role in sharing the
idea of designing with air. For instance, a landscape architect dis-
cussed windbreak design, while an air quality researcher offered
perspectives on managing air pollution. Others also shared their
Figure 14: User interface of automating computational tools.
cultural and climatic backgrounds, enriching the discussion with
varied perceptions of air. This interdisciplinary dialogue aligns with
Christopher Frayling’s view that RtD can profoundly connect de-
sign with culture and society [ 20]. Even the word ‘air’ itself can
convey a sense of tension in the environment, as it is used in var-
ious ways in our daily lives. By observing these discussions and
outcomes of workshops, these already established profound con-
nections with people and society with air make it a unique and
meaningful design medium.
One participant even noted that these materials could extend
beyond the design domain, inviting a broader audience to engage in
exploration and innovation in various formats.“As a designer, I often
find myself trying to imagine what kind of product or concept... I did
the same with the prompts. However, I believe that my five-year-old
brother would likely come up with a beautiful story instead. I wonder
if my role as a designer sometimes hinders my ability to create beyond
my professional boundaries. Perhaps people who are not designers
can come up with more diverse ideas that are not design-oriented.
(P10)" This dialogue highlights the designers’ further responsibility
beyond creating a toolkit, which involves pushing the boundaries of
conventional thinking. Our approach and study revealed that, while
the concept of air is often under-explored, it presents numerous
possibilities to explore as a design material. It prompts us to think
about the potential of other materials that we may overlook in our
daily lives. Basic elements like humidity, scent, and weight are often
disregarded as possible media for design, yet they can be incredibly
useful for creative purposes. By expanding the focus beyond famil-
iar materials, we can uncover untapped resources, like air. In fact,
the abundance and ubiquity of overlooked materials suggest that
they may be rich resources for design. Their universality provides a
common foundation for shared experiences, facilitating the creation
of cohesive design language. At the same time, their versatility al-
lows for diverse interpretations and personalization. Our approach
and investigation demonstrate the value of exploring materials be-
yond the traditional, examining their inherent properties beyond
their physical attributes.
8 Conclusion
We created AirCraft, a toolkit comprises of a brainstorming wheel,
elemental discovery cards, and prototyping blocks to empower de-
signers to explore, design, and prototype air-based interactions.
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
During our generative design workshops, which involved 12 par-
ticipants with diverse design backgrounds and technical skills, we
evaluated the effectiveness of the toolkit and identified areas for im-
provement. Our findings show that the toolkit effectively supports
the creation of diverse interactive design concepts that leverage
differing I/O approaches and modalities. Findings also suggest that
it changes participants’ perceptions of air and enhances recognition
of air as a design material. For participants, the availability of the
toolkit also made air seem more tangible, accessible to them for de-
sign prototyping, and approachable regardless of their limited tech-
nical expertise. We urge design researchers to further investigate
the potential of air in interaction design and cultivate designerly
supports for further exploration of this often overlooked material
for interaction.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the STUDIO for Creative Inquiry’s
Frank-Ratchye Further Fund [grant number 2024-017] at Carnegie
Mellon University.
References
[1] 2012. Pu Gong Ying Tu (Dandelion Painting) – Jie Qi. https://technolojie.com/pu-
gong-ying-tu-dandelion-painting/
[2] 2019. IDEO Method Cards: 51 Ways to Inspire Design. https://stoutbooks.com/
products/ideo-method-cards-51-ways-to-inspire-design-61457
[3] 2019. Method Cards. https://www.ideo.com/journal/method-cards
[4] 2019. Tiles IoT Inventor Toolkit – Play with Tiles. Change the world! https:
//www.tilestoolkit.io/
[5] Francesca Ambrogio. 2024. Air as a Design Tool: Raw Material, Infra-material
Space, and Transformative Matter. CHE. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
49811-4_30 Accepted: 2024-03-19T07:30:32Z.
[6] AnOther. 2013. The Uncanny by Berndnaut Smilde. https://www.anothermag.
com/art-photography/2358/the-uncanny-by-berndnaut-smilde Section: Art &
Photography.
[7] Aether Architects. 2019. Air Mountain: This Transparent Inflatable Pavilion is
Clearly Fun | Designs & Ideas on Dornob. https://dornob.com/air-mountain-
this-transparent-inflatable-pavilion-is-clearly-fun/
[8] Tristan Beech. 2008. Scott Snibbe Wind Installation. https://gizmosf.com/scott-
snibbe-wind-installation/
[9] Theo Botschuijver. 1969. Theo Botschuiver Blow up Artist | florisleeuwen-
berg.com. https://florisleeuwenberg.com/?project=theo-botschuiver-blow-up-
artist
[10] john Brooke. 1996. SUS: A ’Quick and Dirty’ Usability Scale. InUsability Evalua-
tion In Industry. CRC Press. Num Pages: 6.
[11] Pascal Bruno, Valentyna Melnyk, and Franziska Völckner. 2017. Temperature and
emotions: Effects of physical temperature on responses to emotional advertising.
International Journal of Research in Marketing 34, 1 (March 2017), 302–320. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2016.08.005
[12] Alexander Calder. 1955. Untitled. https://www.hauserwirth.com/hauser-wirth-
exhibitions/14517-alexander-calder-stony-river-sky/
[13] Anna R. L. Carter, Marianna Obrist, Christopher Dawes, Alan Dix, Jennifer Pear-
son, Matt Jones, Dimitrios Zampelis, and Ceylan Beşevli. 2023. Scent InContext:
Design and Development around Smell in Public and Private Spaces. In Compan-
ion Publication of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS
’23 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
138–141. https://doi.org/10.1145/3563703.3591455
[14] Tom Carter, Sue Ann Seah, Benjamin Long, Bruce Drinkwater, and Sriram Sub-
ramanian. 2013. UltraHaptics: multi-point mid-air haptic feedback for touch
surfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology (UIST ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 505–514. https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502018
[15] Kyung Yun Choi and Hiroshi Ishii. 2019. Bubble Talk: Open-source Interactive
Art Toolkit for Metaphor of Modern Digital Chat. InProceedings of the Thirteenth
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI
’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 525–530. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3294109.3301271
[16] Patricia Cornelio, Carlos Velasco, and Marianna Obrist. 2021. Multisensory
Integration as per Technological Advances: A Review. Frontiers in Neuroscience
15 (June 2021). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.652611 Publisher: Frontiers.
[17] myrto katsikopoulou I. designboom. 2021. ecoLogicStudio erects inflatable air-
purifying eco-machine at COP26. https://www.designboom.com/architecture/
ecologicstudio-air-bubble-air-purifying-eco-machine-cop26-11-12-2021/
[18] Francisco Barbosa Escobar, Carlos Velasco, Kosuke Motoki, Derek Victor Byrne,
and Qian Janice Wang. 2021. The temperature of emotions. PLOS ONE 16, 6 (June
2021), e0252408. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0252408 Publisher: Public
Library of Science.
[19] Jonathan Fincher. 2013. Disney’s Aireal delivers precise tactile feedback out of
thin air. https://newatlas.com/disneys-aireal-tactile-feedback-system/28432/
Section: Electronics.
[20] Christopher Frayling. 1993. Research in Art and Design . Royal College of Art.
[21] Futurice. 2015. Toolkits and frameworks. https://futurice.com/toolkits-and-
frameworks
[22] Barbara Gail Montero. 2015. Body Consciousness: A Philosophy of Mindfulness
and Somaesthetics , by Richard Shusterman Thinking through the Body: Essays
in Somaesthetics , by Richard Shusterman. Mind 124, 495 (July 2015), 975–979.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/fzv065
[23] Orestis Georgiou, William Frier, and Oliver Schneider. 2022. User Experience
and Mid-Air Haptics: Applications, Methods, and Challenges. In Ultrasound
Mid-Air Haptics for Touchless Interfaces, Orestis Georgiou, William Frier, Euan
Freeman, Claudio Pacchierotti, and Takayuki Hoshi (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 21–69. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04043-6_2
[24] Kristian Gohlke, Wolfgang Sattler, and Eva Hornecker. 2022. AirPinch – An
Inflatable Touch Fader with Pneumatic Tactile Feedback. In Proceedings of the
Sixteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interac-
tion (TEI ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3490149.3505568
[25] Meghna Gupta and Grace Eden. 2022. The Human-Air Interface: Responding
To Poor Air Quality Through Lived Experience and Digital Information. In
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1085–1098. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3532106.3533563
[26] Sebastian Günther, Dominik Schön, Florian Müller, Max Mühlhäuser, and Martin
Schmitz. 2020. PneumoVolley: Pressure-based Haptic Feedback on the Head
through Pneumatic Actuation. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’20). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3382916
[27] Bruce Harrington. 2016. Universal Methods of Design: 100 Ways to Research Com-
plex Problems, Develop Innovative Ideas, and Design Effective Solutions . Rockport
Publishers.
[28] Felix Heibeck and Jifei Ou. 2015. https://pneuduino.org/. https://pneuduino.org/
[29] Otmar Hilliges, Shahram Izadi, Andrew D. Wilson, Steve Hodges, Armando
Garcia-Mendoza, and Andreas Butz. 2009. Interactions in the air: adding further
depth to interactive tabletops. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM symposium
on User interface software and technology (UIST ’09) . Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 139–148. https://doi.org/10.1145/1622176.
1622203
[30] Kristina Höök. 2018. Designing with the Body: Somaesthetic Interaction Design .
The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11481.001.0001
[31] IDEO. 2011. Design Kit: The Human-Centered Design Toolkit. https://www.
ideo.com/journal/design-kit-the-human-centered-design-toolkit
[32] Theo Jansen. 2017. animaris mulus.
[33] Seungwoo Je, Hyelip Lee, Myung Jin Kim, and Andrea Bianchi. 2018. Wind-blaster:
a wearable propeller-based prototype that provides ungrounded force-feedback.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2018 Emerging Technologies (SIGGRAPH ’18) . Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–2. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3214907.3214915
[34] Kevin John, Yinan Li, and Hasti Seifi. 2024. AdapTics: A Toolkit for Creative
Design and Integration of Real-Time Adaptive Mid-Air Ultrasound Tactons.
In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642090
[35] Witaya Junma. 2019. INTO THE WIND - Witaya Junma. http://www.
witayajunma.com/into-the-wind.html
[36] Ozgun Kilic Afsar, Ali Shtarbanov, Hila Mor, Ken Nakagaki, Jack Forman, Karen
Modrei, Seung Hee Jeong, Klas Hjort, Kristina Höök, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2021.
OmniFiber: Integrated Fluidic Fiber Actuators for Weaving Movement based In-
teractions into the ‘Fabric of Everyday Life’. InThe 34th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’21) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1010–1026. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.
3474802
[37] Dong Wook Kim and Hiroshi Ando. 2010. Development of directional olfactory
display. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual-Reality
Continuum and its Applications in Industry (VRCAI ’10) . Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 143–144. https://doi.org/10.1145/1900179.
1900208
[38] Jin Ryong Kim. 2022. Multimodal Interaction with Mid-Air Haptics. InUltrasound
Mid-Air Haptics for Touchless Interfaces, Orestis Georgiou, William Frier, Euan
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
Freeman, Claudio Pacchierotti, and Takayuki Hoshi (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 185–205. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04043-6_7
[39] Yuki Kubo, Hirobumi Tomita, Shuta Nakamae, Takayuki Hoshi, and Yoichi Ochiai.
2016. Bubble Cloud: Projection of an Image onto a Bubble Cluster. In Proceedings
of the 13th International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment
Technology (ACE ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1145/3001773.3001815
[40] Situation Lab. 2015. The Thing From The Future. https://situationlab.org/project/
the-thing-from-the-future/
[41] Susana Cámara Leret and Valentijn Visch. 2017. From Smells to Stories: The
Design and Evaluation of The Smell Memory Kit. https://www.ijdesign.org/
index.php/IJDesign/article/view/2572
[42] Chungman Lim, Gunhyuk Park, and Hasti Seifi. 2024. Designing Distinguishable
Mid-Air Ultrasound Tactons with Temporal Parameters. In Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3613904.3642522
[43] Hannah Limerick. 2020. Call to interact: communicating interactivity and
affordances for contactless gesture controlled public displays. In Proceedings
of the 9TH ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays (PerDis ’20) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 63–70. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3393712.3395338
[44] Guanhong Liu, Haiqing Xu, Xianghua(Sharon) Ding, Mingyue Gao, Bowen Li,
Fushen Ruan, and Haipeng Mi. 2022. ”It Puts Life into My Creations”: Un-
derstanding Fluid Fiber as a Media for Expressive Display. In CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501990
[45] Dan Lockton, David Harrison, and Neville A. Stanton. 2010. The Design with
Intent Method: A design tool for influencing user behaviour. Applied Ergonomics
41, 3 (May 2010), 382–392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2009.09.001
[46] Yiyue Luo, Kui Wu, Andrew Spielberg, Michael Foshey, Daniela Rus, Tomás
Palacios, and Wojciech Matusik. 2022. Digital Fabrication of Pneumatic Actuators
with Integrated Sensing by Machine Knitting. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3491102.3517577
[47] Miranda Luong, Daragh Byrne, and Marti Louw. 2021. MakerCards: Designing An
Electronic Component Discovery Tool to Support Remote Physical Computing
Education. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Interaction Design and Children
Conference (IDC ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
476–482. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459990.3465196
[48] Martin Maunsbach, William Frier, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2024. MAMMOTH:
Mid-Air Mesh-based Modulation Optimization Toolkit for Haptics. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–7.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3651060
[49] Anna Mavroudi, Monica Divitini, Simone Mora, and Francesco Gianni. 2018.
Game-Based Learning for IoT: The Tiles Inventor Toolkit. In Interactive Mobile
Communication Technologies and Learning, Michael E. Auer and Thrasyvoulos
Tsiatsos (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 294–305. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-75175-7_31
[50] A. K. Melikov and J. Kaczmarczyk. 2012. Air movement and perceived air quality.
Building and Environment 47 (Jan. 2012), 400–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
buildenv.2011.06.017
[51] Tian Min, Chengshuo Xia, Takumi Yamamoto, and Yuta Sugiura. 2023. Seeing
the Wind: An Interactive Mist Interface for Airflow Input. Proceedings of the
ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, ISS (Nov. 2023), 444:398–444:419. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3626480
[52] Akira Nakayasu. 2020. Animated robotic sculptures: using SMA motion display
to create lifelike movements. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2020 Art Gallery (SIGGRAPH
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 419–423. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3386567.3388572
[53] David Narciso, Miguel Melo, José Vasconcelos-Raposo, and Maximino Bessa.
2020. The Impact of Olfactory and Wind Stimuli on 360 Videos Using Head-
mounted Displays. ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 17, 1 (Feb. 2020), 4:1–4:13. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3380903
[54] Timothy Neate, Sergio Alvares Maffra, William Frier, Zihao You, and Stephanie
Wilson. 2023. Using Mid-Air Haptics to Guide Mid-Air Interactions. In
Human-Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2023 , José Abdelnour Nocera, Marta
Kristín Lárusdóttir, Helen Petrie, Antonio Piccinno, and Marco Winckler (Eds.).
Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 43–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
42280-5_3
[55] Isabel Neto, Yuhan Hu, Filipa Correia, Filipa Rocha, Guy Hoffman, Hugo Nicolau,
and Ana Paiva. 2024. Conveying Emotions through Shape-changing to Children
with and without Visual Impairment. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642525
[56] Clemens Noelke, Mark McGovern, Daniel J. Corsi, Marcia P. Jimenez, Ari Stern,
Ian Sue Wing, and Lisa Berkman. 2016. Increasing ambient temperature reduces
emotional well-being. Environmental Research 151 (Nov. 2016), 124–129. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2016.06.045
[57] Jifei Ou, Felix Heibeck, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. TEI 2016 Studio: Inflated Curiosity.
In Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 766–769. https://doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2854119
[58] Dorian Peters, Lian Loke, and Naseem Ahmadpour. 2021. Toolkits, cards and
games – a review of analogue tools for collaborative ideation. CoDesign 17, 4
(Oct. 2021), 410–434. https://doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2020.1715444 Publisher:
Taylor & Francis _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2020.1715444.
[59] Michael Pinsky. 2018. Pollution Pods – M i c h a e l P i n s k y. https://www.
michaelpinsky.com/portfolio/pollution-pods-2/
[60] J. Douglas Porteous. 1985. Smellscape. Progress in Physical Geography:
Earth and Environment 9, 3 (Sept. 1985), 356–378. https://doi.org/10.1177/
030913338500900303 Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd.
[61] Jonathan Posner, James A. Russell, and Bradley S. Peterson. 2005. The circumplex
model of affect: An integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive
development, and psychopathology. Development and psychopathology 17, 3
(2005), 715–734. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579405050340
[62] Preciosa. 2018. Breath of Light. https://www.preciosalighting.com/breath-of-
light
[63] Nimesha Ranasinghe, Pravar Jain, Shienny Karwita, David Tolley, and Ellen Yi-
Luen Do. 2017. Ambiotherm: Enhancing Sense of Presence in Virtual Reality by
Simulating Real-World Environmental Conditions. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1731–1742. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3025453.3025723
[64] Photchara Ratsamee, Yusuke Orita, Yoshihiro Kuroda, and Haruo Takemura. 2021.
FlowHaptics: Mid-Air Haptic Representation of Liquid Flow. Applied Sciences 11,
18 (Jan. 2021), 8447. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11188447 Number: 18 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[65] Daan Roosegaarde. 2010. Lotus 7.0. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Art Gallery (SIG-
GRAPH ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 408–409.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1836786.1836805
[66] Elena Sabinson, Jack Neiberg, and Keith Evan Green. 2024. With Every Breath:
Testing the Effects of Soft Robotic Surfaces on Attention and Stress. InProceedings
of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI
’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 611–620. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3610977.3635004
[67] Aryan Saini, Rakesh Patibanda, Nathalie Overdevest, Elise Van Den Hoven, and
Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller. 2024. PneuMa: Designing Pneumatic Bodily Extensions
for Supporting Movement in Everyday Life. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI
’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3623509.3633349
[68] Harpreet Sareen, Yibo Fu, Nour Boulahcen, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2023. BubbleTex:
Designing Heterogenous Wettable Areas for Carbonation Bubble Patterns on
Surfaces. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581030
[69] Thecla Schiphorst. 2009. soft(n): toward a somaesthetics of touch. In CHI ’09
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’09) . As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2427–2438. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1520340.1520345
[70] Hasti Seifi, Sean Chew, Antony James Nascè, William Edward Lowther, William
Frier, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2023. Feellustrator: A Design Tool for Ultrasound
Mid-Air Haptics. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580728
[71] Yasuhiro Shimazaki, Atsumasa Yoshida, and Takanori Yamamoto. 2015. Thermal
responses and perceptions under distinct ambient temperature and wind con-
ditions. Journal of Thermal Biology 49-50 (April 2015), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jtherbio.2015.01.005
[72] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry
Pi” for Soft Robotics. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’21). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[73] Ali Shtarbanov, Mengjia Zhu, Nicholas Colonnese, and Amirhossein Haji-
agha Memar. 2023. SleeveIO: Modular and Reconfigurable Platform for Multi-
modal Wearable Haptic Feedback Interactions. In Proceedings of the 36th An-
nual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606739
[74] Kate Sierzputowski. 2019. KAWS Floats a Massive Inflatable Sculpture in
Hong Kong’s Victoria Harbour. https://www.thisiscolossal.com/2019/03/kaws-
companion-hong-kong/
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
[75] Rajinder Sodhi, Ivan Poupyrev, Matthew Glisson, and Ali Israr. 2013. AIREAL:
interactive tactile experiences in free air. ACM Transactions on Graphics 32, 4
(July 2013), 134:1–134:10. https://doi.org/10.1145/2461912.2462007
[76] Ekaterina R. Stepanova, John Desnoyers-Stewart, Philippe Pasquier, and Bern-
hard E. Riecke. 2020. JeL: Breathing Together to Connect with Others and
Nature. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
(DIS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 641–654.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395532
[77] Paul Tennent, Duncan Rowland, Joe Marshall, Stefan Rennick Egglestone, Alexan-
der Harrison, Zachary Jaime, Brendan Walker, and Steve Benford. 2011. Breathal-
ising games: understanding the potential of breath control in game interfaces.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Advances in Computer En-
tertainment Technology. ACM, Lisbon Portugal, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2071423.2071496
[78] Chun-Miao Tseng, Po-Yu Chen, Shih Chin Lin, Yu-Wei Wang, Yu-Hsin Lin, Mu-An
Kuo, Neng-Hao Yu, and Mike Y. Chen. 2022. HeadWind: Enhancing Teleportation
Experience in VR by Simulating Air Drag during Rapid Motion. In Proceedings
of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3491102.3501890
[79] Muhammad Umair, Corina Sas, and Miquel Alfaras. 2020. ThermoPixels:
Toolkit for Personalizing Arousal-based Interfaces through Hybrid Crafting.
In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS
’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1017–1032.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395512
[80] Katrien van Riet, Bas Overvelde, Shibo Zou, and Frank Delbressine. 2023. Soft
Circuits Toolkit. https://www.4tu.nl/du/projects/Soft-Circuits-Toolkit/
[81] Hannes Waldschütz, Rosa Van Koningsbruggen, and Eva Hornecker. 2024. pneuC-
NTRL: a Pneumatic Control System for User Studies on Dynamic, Haptic In-
flatables. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’24). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3623509.3635263
[82] Guanyun Wang, Chenda Zheng, Yanbo Fu, Kuangqi Zhu, Fuyi Lai, Likang Zhang,
Mengyang Li, Xiaoyang Wu, Muyi Ren, Yanpei Zheng, Boyi Lian, Kexin Zhang,
Qi Wang, Cheng Yao, Shijian Luo, Fangtian Ying, Lingyun Sun, and Ye Tao. 2024.
KiPneu: Designing a Constructive Pneumatic Platform for Biomimicry Learning
in STEAM Education. InProceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems
Conference (DIS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
441–458. https://doi.org/10.1145/3643834.3661828
[83] Guanyun Wang, Kuangqi Zhu, Lingchuan Zhou, Mengyan Guo, Haotian Chen,
Zihan Yan, Deying Pan, Yue Yang, Jiaji Li, Jiang Wu, Ye Tao, and Lingyun Sun.
2023. PneuFab: Designing Low-Cost 3D-Printed Inflatable Structures for Blow
Molding Artifacts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580923
[84] Andy Warhol. 2014. Andy Warhol’s Silver Clouds: More Than Just Hot Air.
https://www.warhol.org/andy-warhols-silver-clouds-more-than-just-hot-air/
[85] Alexander Wilberz, Dominik Leschtschow, Christina Trepkowski, Jens Maiero,
Ernst Kruijff, and Bernhard Riecke. 2020. FaceHaptics: Robot Arm based Versatile
Facial Haptics for Immersive Environments. InProceedings of the 2020 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’20). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376481
[86] Johan Willander and Maria Larsson. 2006. Smell your way back to childhood:
Autobiographical odor memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 13, 2 (April 2006),
240–244. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03193837
[87] T. Xu, Edward A. Arens, and Fred Bauman. 1995. The effects of high-level air
humidity on subjective perception of comfort. (Sept. 1995). https://escholarship.
org/uc/item/2cc4525b
[88] Lining Yao, Ryuma Niiyama, Jifei Ou, Sean Follmer, Clark Della Silva, and Hi-
roshi Ishii. 2013. PneUI: pneumatically actuated soft composite materials for
shape changing interfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium
on User interface software and technology (UIST ’13) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 13–22. https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502037
[89] Youchan Yim and Fumihide Tanaka. 2024. Integration of a Shape Memory Alloy
with a Soft Pneumatic Actuator to Improve the Haptic Interaction Performance
of a Soft Social Robot. In Extended Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3650922
[90] Hye Jun Youn and Ali Shtarbanov. 2022. PneuBots: Modular Inflatables for Playful
Exploration of Soft Robotics. In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’22) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3514490
[91] Yichen Yu, Richard de Dear, Kapil Chauhan, and Jianlei Niu. 2021. Impact of
wind turbulence on thermal perception in the urban microclimate. Journal of
Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics 216 (Sept. 2021), 104714. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jweia.2021.104714
[92] Christian Zagel, Lena Grimm, and Xun Luo. 2019. Method Cards – A New
Concept for Teaching in Academia and to Innovate in SMEs. In Advances in
Artificial Intelligence, Software and Systems Engineering , Tareq Z. Ahram (Ed.).
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 230–241. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-94229-2_22
[93] John Zimmerman and Jodi Forlizzi. 2014. Research Through Design in HCI. In
Ways of Knowing in HCI , Judith S. Olson and Wendy A. Kellogg (Eds.). Springer,
New York, NY, 167–189. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0378-8_8
[94] John Zimmerman, Jodi Forlizzi, and Shelley Evenson. 2007. Research through
design as a method for interaction design research in HCI. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’07). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 493–502. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1240624.1240704
A Elemental Discovery Cards
A.1 Double Sided Cards
Figure 15: Table of double-sided cards
TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France Semina Yi, Daragh Byrne, and Dina El-Zanfaly
A.2 Single Sided Cards
Figure 16: Table single-sided cards
B Templates for Storyboards and Prototypes
from the Generative Design Workshop
Figure 17: Templates for storyboarding and prototyping
C Storyboards from the Generative Design
Workshop
AirCraft: Exploring Air as a Design Medium TEI ’25, March 04–07, 2025, Bordeaux / Talence, France
Figure 18: Storyboards from the generative design workshop