LivingLoom: Investigating Human-Plant Symbiosis Through 
Integrating Living Plants Into (E-)Textiles 
Jingwen Zhu 
Hybrid Body Lab 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, New York, USA 
jz497@cornell.edu 
Ruth Zhao 
Hybrid Body Lab 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, New York, USA 
ruthzhao05@gmail.com 
Samantha Chang 
Hybrid Body Lab 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, New York, USA 
sjc333@cornell.edu 
Cindy Hsin-Liu Kao 
Hybrid Body Lab 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, New York, USA 
cindykao@cornell.edu 
Figure 1: We present LivingLoom, a design inquiry and fabrication approach integrating living plants into textiles. We 
demonstrate fve sample applications: (a) Self-caring hat; (b) Touch-sensing hairband; (c) Garden pillow; (d)Rattan woven bag; 
(e) Outdoor activity encouraging sandals. 
Abstract 
LivingLoom is a design inquiry that proposes a post-anthropocentric 
approach to fabrication by integrating living plants directly into tex-
tiles. Industrial textile fabrication views plants as passive resources. 
They are grown, harvested, and spun into yarns for textile produc-
tion, mainly to serve human needs. While efcient, this approach 
overlooks the intrinsic value of these organisms as living beings. 
LivingLoom fabrication approach wet-spins biodegradable yarns 
with seeds that can be further integrated into textiles that can sprout 
and grow. We present a design space for incorporating microgreen 
seeds into textiles with a 10-day growth cycle, leveraging care-
based fabrication and interaction. We conducted a three-day user 
study to understand how people wear and care for plant-integrated 
textiles, revealing new possibilities for living textiles and care-based 
interactions. LivingLoom examines the intimacy between humans 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’25, Yokohama, Japan 
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1394-1/25/04 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713156 
and plants in textile forms, shedding light on the design potential 
for the care-based fabrication of (e-)textiles. 
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interac-
tion (HCI). 
Keywords 
plants, wearable, e-textiles, care-based interactions 
ACM Reference Format: 
Jingwen Zhu, Samantha Chang, Ruth Zhao, and Cindy Hsin-Liu Kao. 2025. 
LivingLoom: Investigating Human-Plant Symbiosis Through Integrating 
Living Plants Into (E-)Textiles. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’25), April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713156 
1 Introduction 
Integrating plant-based fbers into textiles has a long history, where 
crops like cotton and hemp are grown, harvested, and spun into 
yarns; in certain cultures, tree barks are harvested and beaten to 
form non-woven bark cloth. However, there has always been a 
tension between the material agency and human desire [39, 46]. 
Industrial fabrication of textiles is often anthropocentric [80], prior-
itizing human needs while viewing plants as passive resources. Al-
though historically, several crafts have been meticulously practiced 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
to follow the nuanced properties of materials such as hemp [99], 
the plants are harvested at human convenience, and their functions 
as fber are only activated at the end of their life cycles. While ef-
cient, this “non-living” aspect of textile fabrication overlooks the 
intrinsic value of these organisms as living beings. As a result, the 
livingness of textiles becomes irrelevant to the wearer, with clothing 
being worn, washed, and discarded without regard to its life cycle. 
In LivingLoom, we propose a post-anthropocentric approach [21] 
to textile fabrication by integrating living plants into textiles and 
growing them from seeds to sprouts. We emphasize the care for 
living organisms as the central consideration in the design and 
fabrication process. 
Recent HCI research has explored integrating living organisms 
into wearables, such as cellulose and mycelium as substrates [42, 69] 
and slime mold as conductors [59]. The integration of living organ-
isms emphasizes the importance of care-based interactions [58, 59], 
as maintaining the well-being of living organisms is critical to the 
function of the devices. Amongst caring for living organisms, caring 
for plants has been a common practice that many people are already 
familiar with. The visible scale of plants is easy to observe compared 
to microorganisms, and many categories of plants share the same 
living condition requirements as humans, including temperature, 
light, and humidity, enabling the potential design of cohabitation 
interactions. Additionally, they are naturally biodegradable and 
decomposable materials. Recent HCI research has explored human-
plant relationships [31, 91] and uses plants as sensors and actuators 
to enable novel integrations [20, 36]. However, caring for plants 
integrated into textiles via wet spinning seeds into fber has not yet 
been explored. Certain plants, such as microgreens, have fber-like 
textures, and their roots form an interlaced structure with geometric 
similarities with textiles. In this work, we choose microgreens as the 
“material” for living textile integration to enable new cohabitating 
interaction between humans and textiles. In taking a perspective of 
human-plant symbiosis, we aim to examine a shift in the position of 
the perspective from human-centered interactions, enabling critical 
exploration of design considerations for more-than-human-centered 
design approaches [73, 95]. 
We present LivingLoom, a design inquiry on plant-integrated 
wearable textiles. By integrating living plants into textiles, we con-
tribute to a post-anthropocentric approach of care-based fabrication 
and open up new possibilities for novel interactions with smart 
textiles. Our main contributions are: 
(1) We present a design space of integrating microgreen sprouts 
into textiles via wet spinning seed-integrated hydrogel yarns 
with a 10-day growth cycle. 
(2) We contribute yarn-based fabrication methods and characteriza-
tion of diferent yarn integration recipes to integrate microgreen 
seeds into textiles that yield a high germination rate and healthy 
growth. 
(3) We demonstrate how hardware and e-textile design can be 
applied to integrate seed-integrated yarns into wearable textiles 
that enable cohabitation and care-based interaction modalities. 
(4) We conduct a user study with participants wearing LivingLoom 
devices and probe their perception of wearing and caring for 
living textiles to achieve human-plant symbiosis. 
2 Related Work 
2.1 Living Plants Integrated Interactions 
Plants are one of the most common non-human species living in 
ambient environments shared with humans. Indoor plants can me-
diate the environment to provide additional oxygen for a healthy 
living environment and decorate the space. Indoor herb gardens 
and microgreen gardens also provide a utilitarian function to sup-
port additional food sources. Outdoor plants are essential for soil 
retention and provide an ecosystem for multispecies habitation. 
In HCI research, researchers have investigated various opportu-
nities for human interactions with living plants [31, 40, 91]. Hu et al. 
explored designing plant-driven actuators for growable robots [36] 
while Nam et al. integrated plants into wearable accessories [65]. 
Explorations in woodworking also examine the interaction with 
living materials to collaborate with more-than-human entities for 
sustainable design and digital fabrication [22, 70]. Prior work also 
explores integrating electronic hardware to enable novel human-
plant interactions [15, 83] or robotically printing plants into typog-
raphy [33]. Beyond interactions, researchers have also explored the 
biosensing of plants to increase the understanding of their health 
conditions through integrating conductive sensors via stems [20] 
and attaching microfuidic chips for plant condition monitoring 
and diagnosis [60]. These technical explorations enable additional 
support for plant care at various scales. HCI researchers have also 
examined the symbiotic relationship in sustainable agriculture [57] 
while studies in nature relations explore community awareness in 
gardening [82]. 
In this work, we explore the integration of living plants into wear-
able textiles to uncover unique design opportunities. By embedding 
seeds into yarns, these plant-integrated textiles ofer wearers a 
novel experience, where tending to a plant-textile hybrid becomes 
a distinctive form of plant care. 
2.2 Bio-based & Living Materials for Wearables 
Recent advancements in bio-based materials have opened new av-
enues for developing wearable applications of various form fac-
tors [4, 29, 47, 53, 63, 68]. Specifcally, bio-based materials have 
been used to fabricate biodegradable fber with unique functions, 
such as conductivity [101], water-solubility [52], or optical sens-
ing [30]. These bio-based materials ofer biodegradability for tex-
tiles [97] and enable sustainable interaction design opportunities, 
including disposal, renewal, and reuse [10]. Additionally, research 
in decomposable electronics [18, 90] enables integrating circuitry 
components that can be decomposed at the end of their life cycle. 
The notion of design for decay [55, 89] examines the life cycle of 
materials beyond the commonly focused "usage period" and values 
transition towards the material’s end of life. 
While bio-based materials ofer sustainability and biocompat-
ibility through their organic origins, living materials take this a 
step further by incorporating dynamic biological processes [64]. 
Living materials, such as SCOBY [5, 6, 66, 69], natto cells [98], 
slime mold [59], and mycelium [94], ofer unique opportunities for 
wearable technologies that can grow, morph, or adapt to their en-
vironment. In addition to these materials for wearable fabrication, 
researchers have been identifying opportunities and challenges 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
for integrating living microorganisms in human-computer interac-
tions [77]. 
More recent work examined living materials targeted for utilizing 
the growth as factor for fabrication and integration, including bac-
terial cellulose for sustainable fashion [11], cultivating microorgan-
isms for textile design [8], growing mycelium paste for textiles [42], 
and growing silkworms [38] and spiders [92] for silk constructed 
structures. Furthermore, recent work in material science uses bac-
terial bioflm to achieve self-repairing abilities [14], leveraging the 
growing activity as a critical element of textile fabrication. As living 
materials often require advanced equipment and facilities to handle, 
HCI researchers have explored Do-It-Yourself (DIY) approaches for 
biological lab experiments, such as DIYBio [48, 49], my frst bio lab 
[27], and open liquid-handling [28]. 
Beyond the aforementioned explorations from the academic re-
search community, the art and design community has been ex-
ploring novel ways of integrating living plants into textiles and 
wearables. Zena Holloway [35] used interwoven roots to create 
wearable sculptures, while Jonathan Anderson’s Loewe Spring Sum-
mer men’s collection [1] presented a grass coat that brings living 
textiles to the fashion runway. Designers and artists have also been 
manually integrating seeds into fbers and textiles to further grow 
plants from textiles [25, 45, 85, 93, 96]. While these works explore 
the diverse aesthetics ofered by living plants as a fnished product, 
there’s a lack of attention to the human-plant relationship during 
the growth process. 
In this work, we explore the integration of living plants to create 
growable, living textiles. This unique hybrid of plants and textiles 
remains largely underexplored, primarily due to the practical chal-
lenges of providing a suitable growing medium for plants in textile 
forms. We leverage open-source hardware for DIY wet spinning 
techniques to fabricate seed-integrated hydrogel yarns, allowing 
further textile integration through various textile fabrication tech-
niques. 
2.3 Designing for Care-based Interaction toward 
Symbiosis 
In recent years, there has been growing interest in exploring care-
based interaction design that emphasizes cohabitation between 
humans and nonhumans. Liu et al. propose the concept of col-
laborative survival, shifting design perspectives toward fostering 
coexistence with nonhuman entities [56]. More recent work ex-
amines the non-human perspectives in the interaction with living 
organisms [6, 17, 72, 78]. Recognizing temporality has been a key 
focus in designing from nonhuman perspectives. Previous work 
explores temporalities by highlighting the difering life cycles and 
rhythms of nonhuman organisms compared to humans, decentering 
human perspectives to promote multispecies agencies [6, 7, 67, 88]. 
Oogjes et al. argue the use of "event" to articulate temporalities in 
this new design perspective [74]. 
Several explorations have been conducted to understand nu-
anced interaction between human and non-human entities in a 
non-human-centric perspective. Lu et al. designed a wearable de-
vice that relies on physical care for living slime mold as an interac-
tive function, exploring care-based interactions [58, 59]. Zhou et al. 
deployed cyanobacteria-integrated artifacts to participants explor-
ing the roles of materiality in care [100]. These studies highlight 
the potential of care-based interactions to foster deeper, symbi-
otic relationships between humans and non-human organisms, 
promoting a more holistic understanding of multispecies interac-
tions in everyday life. Community-engaged workshops introducing 
bio-electronic soil sensing systems further expanded the involve-
ment of interaction with living systems in real-world scenarios [50]. 
These explorations inform new design considerations of the human-
nonhuman symbiotic relationships and the value of livingness as 
material quality [44]. In the textile context, explorations in func-
tional clothing for skin and textile microbiome relationship exam-
ine utilitarian benefts [13], while research in caring and repairing 
textiles as a way to design examines extending fashion product 
lifecycles through textile care [61]. 
Our work aims to probe the unique caring and wearing experi-
ence of human-plant symbiosis. We examine the process of inte-
grating seeds into textiles and observe the process of caring for the 
entire germination and sprouting process during the fabrication 
and wearing phases to shine a light on the afordances of living 
textiles in the multispecies interactions. 
3 Care-based Fabrication 
In this work, we present an approach towards integrating living 
plants into our fabrication process. Through iterative prototyp-
ing, we found that plants sprouting from seeds require daily care 
and are highly sensitive to ambient conditions and the caretaker’s 
actions—unlike any of our previous fabrication experiences. We 
choose to call this approach Care-Based Fabrication, which empha-
sizes the need to account for the natural growth cycles of living 
organisms as a central consideration in the design and fabrication 
process (Figure 2). 
Figure 2: Care-Based Fabrications view maker as care con-
dition curator, wearer as caretaker, and living material as 
creator. 
Care-based fabrication redefnes the traditional boundaries of 
the fabrication process, extending it beyond the point where a 
maker typically considers the artifact "complete. " In conventional 
fabrication, the process ends once the raw materials have been 
transformed into the fnal product, such as when a woven textile 
is removed from the loom or the last stitch of embroidery is tied. 
However, in care-based fabrication, this is only the beginning. The 
artifact, now containing living materials, must be placed in appro-
priate conditions to support growth, requiring ongoing care and 
attention from the maker to ensure its development. We also draw 
from Ingold, who contends the human’s role in making is serving 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
as an wanderer and wayfarer navigating along the materials, rather 
than forcing matter into forms [39]. We extend the wandering and 
wayfaring into an extended timeframe beyond making: the design 
and fabrication process all consider caring for living organisms as 
the key element. 
Care as frst-order consideration in fabrication decision making: 
We propose that makers become the care condition curators in care-
based fabrications. With care as the primary consideration, design 
decisions shift from merely shaping the fnal artifact to curating the 
conditions that support the growth of living organisms. Throughout 
the making process, the maker is responsible for establishing the 
appropriate ambient environment and providing the necessary 
nutrients to facilitate the living organisms’ growth. 
Agency of the living material in shaping fabrication outcome: Tra-
ditional fabrication is often human-centered, manipulating passive 
materials to create forms ideated from human intent. The materials 
often have consistent properties. When stored under proper con-
ditions, the materials do not change drastically over a long period 
of time. In contrast, care-based fabrication centers around the life 
cycle of living materials. Care-based fabrication highlights the liv-
ingness of the organisms, which requires the close care of makers 
as an extension of the fabrication process. The living organisms 
become collaborative creators in such processes. 
A temporal approach towards fabrication: Care-based fabrication 
embraces the temporality in the making that the human-made 
outcome may not be static over the period of making and post-
making [37, 71]. The biological growth, reproduction, and decaying 
are impacted by the design decisions in the making process and are 
also tied to the caring behavior provided by human post-making. 
Depending on the type of living materials and the life cycle stage, 
the outcome form can change throughout time at various paces. 
In this dynamic process, the user or wearer takes on the role of 
caretaker, responsible for providing the necessary care to support 
the ongoing vitality of the living organisms. 
LivingLoom is a design inquiry exploring plant-integrated tex-
tiles as living materials to examine the practice of care-based fabri-
cations. 
4 LivingLoom 
The LivingLoom fabrication approach (Figure 3) integrates seeds 
into 1D hydrogel yarns, which also function as a growth medium for 
seeds to germinate and sprout. Then, through textile integration, the 
yarns are integrated into 2D textiles, which ofers water retention 
and root support to the seed’s growth. Through this process, the 
seeds are prepared with nutrients, growing space, and water to 
grow. Lastly, through a caring process, the seeds will germinate 
and grow into 3D plant-integrated textiles. 
4.1 Seed-Integrated Hydrogel Yarns as Growth 
Medium for Living Seeds 
LivingLoom explores integrating living plants into yarns to exam-
ine care-based integrations in a textile context. We adopt a wet 
spinning technique to fabricate yarns with living seeds [101]. This 
wet spinning approach is user-friendly and afords Do-It-Yourself 
(DIY) assembly, ofering customizable fabrication to support a range 
of designs. By mixing seeds into a biomaterial-based wet spinning 
Figure 3: Overview of LivingLoom Fabrication Approach 
solution, the spun monoflament yarns contain seeds mixed at the 
desired density. The biomaterial, sodium alginate, derived from 
brown algae or seaweed, also functions as a nutrition source for the 
seeds during the germination stage. The seed-integrated hydrogel 
yarns can be further integrated into textiles through various textile 
fabrication techniques. The integrated textile elements ofer water 
retention and root structuring benefts for the seeds to sprout and 
grow. We summarized the design space of the seed-integrated yarns 
in Figure 4. 
Seed Type: Several considerations determine the choice of seeds. 
First, we choose microgreens as the main category of plants due 
to their availability as seeds for household microgreen gardens, 
suitability for micro-scale leafy plant production [51], and fewer 
health risks as wearable materials compared to non-edible plants. 
The second consideration is the compatibility with hydroponic 
growth without the need for soil. Lastly, wet spinning of hydrogel 
yarns limits compatible seed sizes. For seeds that require presoaking, 
the seed diameters after presoaking cannot exceed the compatible 
size of the wet spinning setup. 
Wet Spinning Solution: We utilize sodium alginate hydrogel as 
the medium for hydroponic growing conditions, ofering water 
and nutrients at the germination and sprouting stage without the 
need for soil. Previous research in the material science feld has 
explored its function as a seed coating to deliver nutrients at an 
early stage of plant growth [87] as well as its positive efect on 
germination [19, 26]. 
Wet Spinning Confguration: We adopt a DIY syringe pump 
approach to wet spin biodegradable functional fber [101]. Although 
prior work has also explored directly hand spinning seeds into 
natural fber such as cotton [45], this work focuses on the wet 
spinning alginate yarns with integrated seeds, utilizing sodium 
alginate as a growth medium for water retention and supplemental 
nutrition [87]. This process is also less labor-intensive than hand-
spinning yarns. 
4.2 Textile Integration as Supportive Growth 
Medium 
Textile integration in LivingLoom supports care-based fabrication 
and emphasizes the care needs of the microgreens as the main 
design consideration. In LivingLoom, the textile integration func-
tions as a supportive growth medium in addition to the sodium 
alginate hydrogel yarn. The textile layer afords water retention 
and root structuring features for the seeds to sprout and grow. We 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 4: LivingLoom Design Space 
summarize the design options for textile integration approaches in 
Figure 4. 
Substrate Lining: Seed-integrated yarns can be attached to a tex-
tile lining, providing additional water retention properties. The 
choice of substrate fabric impacts the caring routine: the water 
retention property of the substrate fabric afects the desired water-
ing frequency, and the density of the fabric afects the space for 
root growth. Furthermore, the material cannot emit hazardous sub-
stances that would potentially harm the growing seeds and must be 
compatible with moist ambient conditions. Substrate lining allows 
the seed-integrated yarns to be tacked to a substrate fabric through 
embroidery stitches such as the couching stitch. This approach al-
lows for the attachment of seed-integrated yarns to various textile 
substrates and pre-fabricated garments, accessories, and upholstery 
fabrics. 
Structure Interlacing: Seed-integrated yarns can be interlaced 
into a textile structure to contact a water-retaining medium closely. 
Compatible textile fabrication techniques include weaving and knit-
ting. Weaving structures with more foats, such as wafe weave, 
present an advantage in water absorption properties that assist the 
water retention for plants [54]. Structure interlacing also allows ad-
justable textile density that provides room for seeds to develop their 
roots during the germination and sprouting phase. The mixed ma-
terials can also provide structural support for the plant-integrated 
textiles. 
Hybrid Layering: Combining the above two approaches, hybrid 
layering leverages textile approaches such as double weave with the 
foating warp to tack the hydrogel yarn into textiles. For example, in 
a double weave structure, the yarns can be tacked on the top layer 
to maximize the exposure to sunlight, while the bottom layer can be 
a woven structure with more foats ofering good water retention 
properties as lining with gap space for the root to develop. 
4.3 Care-based Electronic Integration 
Here, we introduce care-based electronic integration focusing on 
assisting the wearer’s caring activities to support living textiles’ 
growth and establishing a stronger connection between the textile 
and the caretaker. Electronic integration should not shift focus away 
from the plants to other devices or interfaces. In contrast to the 
standard approach in Internet-of-Things that utilizes sensory tech-
nology and automation to minimize the care and attention needed 
from humans [81, 84], we emphasize the attention on plants with 
technology serving a supporting role. We chose not to employ any 
software interfaces or applications that potentially distract humans 
from the caring target, and we curated the following categories of 
electronics that can be integrated for care-based fabrications. These 
electronic integrations are centered around the plants rather than 
the enjoyment of the humans who wear or take care of them: 
Sensors to assist tending decision making: We categorize textile 
moisture, humidity, light, and temperature sensors into the category 
of sensors to assist the tending decision-making process. These 
sensors, paired with pre-programmed settings, can ofer clear care 
prompts, especially for people with less experience caring for plants. 
For example, textile-based moisture sensors can be integrated to 
provide moisture level measurement to assist the wearer in watering 
the textile. 
Actuators to support tending activities: We categorize water 
pumps and growth lights into actuators supporting the human 
caretaker in crucial caretaking activities. An example scenario is 
where the plant-integrated textiles are being worn on a hot summer 
day, and the increased water frequency needs of the plants may 
be too demanding for the wearer to incorporate into their daily 
activities seamlessly. In this case, integrated watering pumps can 
provide additional hydration to the plant-integrated textile. 
Interaction to promote inter-species understanding: Addi-
tional interaction can be integrated to establish an inter-species 
understanding between plant-integrated textiles and humans as 
caretakers during the care-based fabrication process. Examples 
include capacitive touch sensing and proximity sensing, which 
provide additional feedback when people are "patting" the plants. 
These sensors connected to visual or haptic feedback can provide 
human beings additional readings of the plant’s livingness. This 
layer of interaction facilitates understanding between the plant and 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
wearer, which may also promote a stronger sense of responsibility 
for the caretaker to perform better care. 
4.4 Life Cycle 
We summarize LivingLoom plant-integrated textiles into a life cycle 
with four phases. In each phase, the plants undergo specifc life 
conditions and require distinct care from humans. 
Seed Phase: In the preparation phase, seeds are maintained in cool 
and dry conditions to avoid high humidity and high temperature 
causing deterioration. Until the step when seeds are mixed into the 
wet spinning solution, seeds are mixed quickly and dried immedi-
ately after the fber is spun. In this process, seeds are spun into fber 
form at various densities and then integrated into textile forms for 
the following sprouting phase. 
Sprout Phase: In the sprouting phase, the seed germination ab-
sorbs moisture, and their frst root emerges. The beginning of this 
phase for certain microgreen seeds requires a blackout period, dur-
ing which the seeds would be completely shielded from light for 
three to fve days. This process mimics the natural conditions of 
seeds sprouting beneath the soil. At the end of this period, the 
seedlings will develop tiny yellow sprouts (cotyledons), ready for 
further growth under sunlight. If the integrated textiles are placed 
in containers to prevent water evaporation, watering once per day 
is adequate. 
Growth Phase: In the growth phase, the seedlings continuously 
grow in length, and the cotyledons grow and turn green. The mi-
crogreens require sunlight for at least 6 hours daily to grow during 
this phase. This is the stage where the integrated textiles can be 
worn a short amount of times per day yet require close care to 
ensure growth. Although the textile does not need to be covered 
in the dark, the water retention property of the textile substrate 
may require additional watering several times during the day to 
maintain the moisture level or be stored in a container to prevent 
water evaporation when frequent watering is not available. 
Post-Growth Phase: In this phase, textile substrates or structures 
may not be sufcient for the microgreens to develop their roots 
further and grow into adult greens. The integrated textiles can be 
potted into the soil to receive additional nutrients and root growth 
space. Since the yarn is biodegradable, the textile can be dissembled 
or directly decomposed in the soil if the textile integration also 
uses decomposable fber materials. However, insufcient moisture, 
temperature, air, and nutrition may cause the microgreens to decay. 
Although harvesting is a common practice in microgreen farming, 
it is not the focus of this work. 
5 LivingLoom Fabrication Process 
5.1 Seed-Integrated Hydrogel Yarns as Key 
Component 
The key enabling component for LivingLoom is Seed-Integrated 
Hydrogel Yarns. Below, we elaborate on the fabrication process. 
To enable an accessible fabrication approach, we adopted desktop 
wet spinning that is compatible with an of-the-shelf luer-lock 
dispensing needle that can be attached to syringes in a variety of 
volumes [101]. Wet spinning is the process of dissolving polymers 
in a solvent and extruding the flament into a cross-linking agent 
to form the fber [76]. 
Seed Preparation: We choose microgreen seeds due to (1) their 
short growth cycle within two weeks1, which ofers a suitable pace 
for care-based fabrication, (2) their yarn-like scale of their sprouts 
when grown, and (3) safety to wear on the body as they are also 
a food source. After sampling variety types of seeds, including 
Alfalfa, Amaranth, Arugula, Beet, Broccoli, Buckwheat, Cabbage, 
Chia, Cress, Kale, Mustard, Peas, Radish, and Sunfower, we landed 
on Chia seeds for their suitable size, growth requirements, and the 
familiarity as chia pets and food sources [34]. 
Solution Recipe: To ensure wet spin compatibility with DIY desk-
top wet spinner, we evaluated the compatibility of each ingredi-
ent reported in the biofber from prior work [101] regarding their 
capability of providing a healthy environment for Chia seeds to 
germinate and sprout as shown in Table 1. 
Table 1: Seed-Integrated Hydrogel Yarn Sample Formulation. 
Material Amount Function 
Sodium Alginate 4g Bio-polymer 
Glycerin 5g Plasticizer 
Sunfower Seed Oil 0 - 2.25g Plasticizer 
DI Water 150g Solvent 
Chia Seed 8g - 20g Seed 
• Sodium Alginate: Sodium alginate, a bio-polymer derived from 
brown algae or seaweed, is the main formation of the monofl-
ament yarn. Its hydrogel property allows it to rehydrate from 
its dry state to its gel state. Its wet-spin capability allows it to 
be mixed and spun with seeds at room temperature to maintain 
the viability of seeds, which is not aforded by other spinning 
techniques that require preheating of the spinning solution. 
• Glycerin: Glycerin functions as the plasticizer of wet-spun sodium 
alginate yarns. It enhances the fexibility of the material [4] and 
also retains water for plant growth [16]. 
• Sunfower Seed Oil: Sunfower Seed Oil functions as a plasticizer 
to increase the fexibility and elasticity of the yarn [23]. However, 
as the oil increases the hydrophobicity of the material, its impact 
on germination must be considered. We examined the various 
concentrations of sunfower seed oil in the recipe, ranging from 
0 to 1.5%, and compared their tensile strength and sprouting rate 
in Section 5.3. 
• Additives: We explored two types of additives that can poten-
tially enhance the performance of the yarns. The frst is natural 
fertilizer such as seaweed extract (CleanKelp), which can fur-
ther enhance the growth of seeds yet does not change the yarn 
property due to the low concentration in the recipe. However, its 
efect on human skin needs further examination. The second addi-
tive option is carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), a food-thickening 
agent that is often used in food-safe crafting glues. Its adhesion 
property enhances the yarns’ mechanical performance yet pro-
hibits the sprouts’ growth. 
• Calcium Chloride: The coagulation bath for sodium alginate is 
10% calcium chloride (CaCl2). Calcium chloride has also been 
1https://www.bootstrapfarmer.com/blogs/microgreens/the-ultimate-microgreen-
cheat-sheet 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
used as a supplement for plant care at lower concentrations [36]. 
Furthermore, calcium chloride is compatible with direct skin 
contact2. 
Wet Spinning Fabrication: We used the largest size available 
dispensing needle at 12 gauge (McMaster Carr 75165A261) with 
an inner diameter of 0.089" for Chia seeds. The density of seeds 
in yarns is afected by two factors: the weight ratio of seeds in 
solution and the drawing strength during the coagulation bath and 
drying process. The wet spinning seed-integrated yarns contain 
seven steps, as shown in Figure 5: 
(1) Mix the solution recipe ingredients, except for the seeds, using 
a kitchen blender or overhead mixer. 
(2) Sterilize the solution by placing the solution in the oven at 60◦C 
for 15 minutes to improve the success germination rate [2]. 
(3) Place the solution in the vacuum chamber to degas for 30 min-
utes, as any bubbles in the solution may result in breakage 
during the spinning process. 
(4) Mix seeds into the solution at the desired weight ratio. 
(5) Place the solution and seeds mix in the vacuum chamber to de-
gas for 30 minutes to remove bubbles introduced in the previous 
step. 
(6) Wet spin the solution mix using a desktop syringe pump, or 
manually extrude the solution into a stirred coagulation bath. 
This step is followed with a wash bath using deionized water 
to remove CaCl2 residue. 
(7) Line dry the yarn overnight. The stretched length of the yarn, 
when dried, also afects the seed density. 
Figure 5: Wet Spinning Fabrication. The green color indicates 
the wet spinning solution. 
5.2 Living Loom: The Fabrication Workfow 
The LivingLoom fabrication workfow follows the life cycle of plant-
integrated textiles as shown in Figure 4. When chia seeds remain 
in the seed phase, we wet spin seed-integrated hydrogel yarns 
and choose textile integration approaches for desired caring needs. 
Materials need to be stored in cool and dry conditions to ensure 
the vitality of seeds. Three textile integration approaches (Figure 6) 
2https://www.cosmeticsinfo.org/ingredient/calcium-chloride/ 
are as follows, and detailed step-by-step instructions are provided 
in the supplementary materials: 
• Substrate Lining: The seed-integrated hydrogel yarns can be 
tacked onto a fabric substrate using hand embroidery stitches 
such as a couching stitch. The density of the fabric substrate 
defnes the root structure after sprouting. 
• Structure Interlacing: The seed-integrated hydrogel yarns can be 
woven interlacing with natural fber. Cotton yarns have strong 
water absorption properties and can be biodegradable, which is a 
preferred choice. Common weaving patterns such as tabby, twill, 
and satin can be used for this integration, while the foating weft 
length impacts the water retention properties. 
• Hybrid Layering: The seed-integrated hydrogel yarns can be wo-
ven in a double weave structure. In this structure, the bottom 
layer can be constructed out of a water-absorbing structure, such 
as a wafe weave, while providing durability. The seed-integrated 
hydrogel yarns will be tacked on the top layer by warps. This 
technique ensures maximum exposure of the seed-integrated 
hydrogel yarns for light and airfow while leveraging water-
absorbing weaving structures for water retention. 
Figure 6: Examples of three textile integration techniques: 
surface tacking, hybrid warp tacking, and structure interlac-
ing. 
After the textile integration, the plant-integrated textiles are 
ready to grow: 
(1) 
Sprout Phase: Place the seed-integrated textiles in dark contain-
ers, such as microgreen sprouting trays covered with panda flm, 
to block sunlight while ensuring airfow to prevent mold. This 
phase lasts 3–5 days, during which daily watering is necessary 
to maintain adequate moisture. 
(2) Growth Phase: Remove the panda flm cover to expose the 
textiles to direct sunlight. If the plant-integrated textiles are 
worn during the day, they will require more frequent watering 
due to increased evaporation in open environments. This phase 
lasts for 5 to 14 days for chia seeds. 
(3) Post-Growth Phase: The plant-integrated textiles should be 
potted in the soil to allow the plants to continue growing into 
their adult stage. 
5.3 Understanding LivingLoom 
Plant-Integrated Textiles 
Here, we characterize the seed-integrated textiles to understand the 
relationship between the mechanical performance of the yarn (for 
human to integrate them into textiles) and their growth potential 
(for plants to grow). 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
Figure 7: Sprout Growing Comparison of the 10-day life cycle. 
Sprout Growing Comparison: We prepared woven samples in 
a wafe weave structure of seed-integrated hydrogel yarns fabri-
cated in various sunfower seed oil concentrations and chia seed 
weight ratios. We grow them starting from the same day in the 
same microgreen growing tray with a transparent cover to ensure 
moisture retention. We used 5mM CaCl2 solution to water the sam-
ples once per day to ensure no contamination from tap water is 
introduced. The water amount is controlled by the same number 
of sprays from the spray bottle, measuring 1mL per day. On day 
0, we added an additional 1mL for each sample to rehydrate. We 
record the growing status through a count of germination rate, 
measurement of sprout height, and photographs of each sample. 
The recording is conducted during the same time window each day. 
Because the LivingLoom approach aims to enable wearers to care 
for and wear the plant-integrated textiles, growth under natural 
sunlight without additional growing lights is chosen for this test. 
The ambient environment temperature and humidity are in the 
range of 20◦C-22◦C, 48%-55%. We observe that a higher percentage 
of chia seed weight ratio yielded higher sprout height over time, 
while a lower chia seed weight ratio yielded higher sprout rate as 
shown in Figure 7. Takeaway: Increasing chia seed concentration 
may result in a higher sprout rate, yet the sprout height may be 
lower. This result informs the design decision of the wet spinning 
confguration for seed-integrated hydrogel yarns. 
Tensile Strength Comparison: We measure the tensile strength 
of the seed-integrated hydrogel yarns using the Instron Universal 
Testing System (Instron 5566). The Instron was set to a gauge length 
of 8 cm, and clamps with a small surface area were used to obtain 
the best results. For each yarn type, we prepared 5 dried samples and 
repeated the abovementioned procedure. We compared the tensile 
Figure 8: Tensile Strengh Comparisons between sunfower 
seeed oil concentration at 0%, 0.5%, 1%, and 1.5%, and chia 
seed weight ratio at 5%, 10%, and 15%. 
strength of diferent sunfower seed oil concentrations at 0%, 0.5%, 
1%, and 1.5% at 10% chia seed weight ratio as shown in Figure 8 (a). 
Striking a balance between brittle yarn with low stretchability vs. 
stretchable yarn with low load at break, the 0.5% and 1% concen-
trations yielded better performance. Additionally, we compare the 
chia seed weight ratio at 5%, 10%, and 15% in spinning solutions 
at 0.5% sunfower seed oil concentration. As shown in Figure 8 (b), 
the increased weight ratio of chia seeds has higher tensile strength. 
Takeaway: Although sunfower seed oil concentration improves 
the tensile strength, 0.5% presents the balance between mechanical 
performance and growing conditions. Based on diferent desired 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
sprout heights, the tensile strength increment at higher seed weight 
ratios needs to be taken into consideration. 
6 User Study: Wear and Care for Living Textiles 
To explore how people wear and care for living textiles in every-
day settings, we conducted a user study using LivingLoom plant-
integrated textiles as a material probe [41] to draw out insight on 
perceptions towards the emergent materialities of the device. We 
also draw on approaches from diary studies [9, 75], in which we 
provided 10 participants with a set of living textile apparatuses and 
care tools to wear and care for in their daily lives. Participants were 
instructed to wear the textiles daily and record their refections over 
three consecutive days. This study seeks to uncover subtle caring 
behaviors around living textiles, as well as participants’ refections 
on cohabitation and caretaking after the experience. This study 
protocol is approved by the university’s institutional review board. 
6.1 Apparatus Design 
We designed the apparatus (Figure 9) based on the following design 
considerations: 
• Visible body location that allows for close observation and care. 
• Considering the late summer weather of the study period, body 
locations where no other clothing or accessories would interfere 
with the apparatus wear were selected. 
• The Growth Phase of the apparatus should ofer visible growth 
that participants can observe. 
• Comfortable wear that does not introduce extra moisture to the 
skin, with minimal health risk. 
• Easy to don and dof, allowing participants to wear at their con-
venience when desired. 
• Additional tools to support the caring to accommodate partici-
pants with various plant-care experiences. 
Figure 9: User study apparatus and caring kit. 
Based on these design considerations, we developed a wristband 
that can be worn with short sleeves in the late summer weather. 
We chose a durable water-repellent feece fabric (Seattle Fabrics 
SWB-Tex 3 Ply Microfeece) to construct the substrate wristband, 
which prevents water penetration from the living textile substrate. 
We chose a wafe weave structure for the living textile integration, 
which supports water absorption. We used sewn-on metal snap 
buttons to attach the living textile onto the substrate wristband. 
The wristband has Velcro on each end as a fastener for adjustable 
sizes. The woven living textiles can be placed in blackout contain-
ers during the Sprout Phase and then attached to the substrate 
wristband for wear. 
To provide additional caring support, we designed an e-textile 
moisture sensor following an existing soil moisture sensor designs3. 
The sensor utilizes insulated conductive fabric traces for capacitive 
moisture sensing. To ensure the insulation under wet conditions, 
we used transparent outdoor fabric repair tape (Gear Aid Tenacious 
Tape Repair Tape) as an insulator, which also ofers superior water 
repellency. We designed a hardware attachment to be connected to 
the e-textile moisture sensor through metal snap button connectors. 
The hardware attachment consists of a microcontroller (Adafruit QT 
Py SAMD21), a button, an RGB LED, a moisture sensor circuit, and 
a 150mAh Lithium Polymer Battery. We 3D printed an enclosure for 
the circuit components with easy access to the button control and 
visible LED indications. When attached to the e-textile moisture 
sensor on the wristband, users can press the button to read the 
moisture level of the living textile, indicated through diferent colors 
shown with the RGB LED. The microcontroller is programmed on 
low-power mode to ensure no battery charging is needed during 
the three-day study. This device is designed for participants to 
understand real-time moisture level requirements for care for living 
textiles. 
In addition to the wristband and hardware attachment, we also 
prepared additional tools to assist the caring process: a 10mL water 
spray bottle for participants to carry with them daily; a tape measure 
for participants to measure the height of the sprouts to obtain 
quantifed observations of the growth; a box container for them 
to store the textile in to prevent water evaporation when it is not 
being worn. 
6.2 Study Design 
We designed a three-day study in which participants took the appa-
ratus home, wore them daily, and reported daily refections. Based 
on the LivingLoom Life Cycle (Figure 4), we chose three days in the 
Growth Phase as the period for study participants to wear and care 
for the living textiles because there will be signifcant growth that 
can be visibly observed by participants and also require close care 
during this phase. The study timeline was carefully planned, and 
participants were scheduled to pick up the device on designated 
days to ensure the study was conducted during the Growth Phase. 
Participants: We recruited 10 participants based on the criteria: 
1) availability to care for the apparatus samples during the desired 
Growth Phase and 2) previous experience taking care of other-than-
human living beings. Recruited participants, age 18 to 37, have 
various experiences caring for plants, summarized in Table 2. The 
3https://monkmakes.com/pmon 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
diverse experience with plants ensures that we can understand the 
caring and wearing experience of living textiles for people with 
various plant-caring experiences and see how prior plant-caring 
knowledge and practice can be transferred to plant-integrated tex-
tiles. 
Table 2: Participants 
ID Age Gender Plant caring Other caring 
experience experience 
P1 28 Male Outdoor garden, Two cats 
>10 houseplants 
P2 28 Female Houseplants Dog, birds 
P3 30 Male No plants Dog 
P4 26 Male One houseplant Cat 
P5 29 Female >10 houseplants N/a 
P6 28 Female Plant science research, Cat 
>10 houseplants 
P7 22 Female Greenhouse plants, Fish 
>10 houseplants 
P8 18 Female 3-5 houseplants Cat 
P9 18 Female 3-5 houseplants Dog 
P10 37 Female Plant science research, Dog 
>10 houseplants 
Study Procedure: 
(1) Pre-study preparation: Participants are asked to pick up the 
apparatus caring kit on day 6 of the growth life cycle. During 
this session, we test the ft of the wristband for each participant 
to ensure a comfortable wearing experience. In addition to the 
wristband, we introduce the role of each item in the caring kit 
and provide instructions on the caring procedure, including 
watering frequency, light and temperature requirements, rec-
ommended wearing time, and protection techniques when not 
wearing. We then demonstrate the use of the moisture sensor 
to assist the caring process. Detailed instructions are provided 
in the supplementary materials. 
(2) Three-Day Study: Participants are prompted to wear the wrist-
band for a total of 2-8 hours daily for three consecutive days. 
Daily wearing time can be adjusted based on participants’ in-
dividual schedules. During the three days, participants are 
prompted to fll out a daily refection survey on Qualtrics and 
take a photo of the device. Daily reminders for refection are sent 
to participants at 8pm each day through text message or email 
based on participants’ preference. The detailed daily survey is 
provided in the supplementary materials. 
(3) Participants return the apparatus back to researchers after three 
days, and the remaining living samples will be continuously 
grown and cared for by researchers. After the device is returned, 
we conduct post-study semi-structured interviews with each 
participant, asking about their overall experience wearing and 
caring for this living textile, the challenges and observations, 
Zhu, et al. 
their refection on caring and cohabitation, and their percep-
tions of the potential of this living material. A gratuity of $ 15 
USD gift card is provided to each participant after completion 
of the study. 
Data Collection: During the study, we collected data in various 
formats: (1) pre-study survey collecting participants’ demographic 
information, prior experience caring for other-than-human living 
beings, prior experience caring for clothing, and their daily routine 
activities related to living textile care; (2) daily refection written in 
text, with survey questions collecting wearing time and plant health 
conditions; (3) daily photos taken by participants; (4) audio record-
ings of the semi-structured interview, which are later transcribed; 
(5) living textile samples returned by participants, continuously 
growing under the care by researchers. 
Data Analysis: Daily survey results are collected and summarized 
as shown in Figure 11. The frst and second authors coded the post-
study interview transcription via thematic analysis [12]. The coding 
was discussed among the frst and last authors and emerged into 
four themes presented below. We selected representative photos 
submitted by participants in Figure 10 to showcase the variety of 
activities they wore the apparatus and conducted. 
Figure 10: User-submitted photos documenting activities per-
formed while wearing the apparatus: (1) P5 commuting by 
driving; (2) P5 taking an outdoor walk; (3) P10 running plant 
health analysis software; (4) P6 placing the apparatus in her 
indoor garden for additional light exposure; (5) P6 grocery 
shopping; (6) P2 working at her desk; (7) and (8) P7 tending 
to her garden. 
6.3 Findings and Observations 
We summarized our observations from the participant’s daily re-
fections in the three-day study and the post-study interview into 
the following themes: 
Understanding care needs as a learning curve: Figure 11 illus-
trates the diverse care practices and plant growth patterns observed 
across the ten participants, highlighting the learning curve involved 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 11: We summarized participants’ caring activities based on submitted survey results, including participants’ self-rated 
plant health, measured sprout height, wearing time, and watering frequency. 
in this new type of care. Both P2 and P4 noticed signs of decay on 
the frst day and adapted their routines accordingly—P2 reduced 
the wearing time, while P4 signifcantly increased watering fre-
quency over the next two days. Participants who wore the device 
for extended periods, such as P5, P6, P9, and P10, found that more 
frequent watering was necessary to maintain plant health. While 
the increased watering demands can be challenging for some, plant-
integrated textiles ofer a unique advantage: their wearability brings 
them into close proximity with the user, encouraging more attentive 
care. P4, for instance, mentioned that he often forgets to water his 
houseplant, which sits quietly on his kitchen counter. In contrast, 
the plant-integrated wristband, worn directly on his body, acted as 
a constant reminder to water and expose it to sunlight, fostering 
more consistent care. 
Intimate relationship between plant and wearer: Participants 
refected on their intimate relationship with the plant-integrated 
textile by comparing it with other-than-human beings they cared 
for. P2 expressed that this on-body interaction with living beings 
they care for reminds her of her birds, as her birds often sit on her 
fngertips or shoulders. Both P3 and P6 mention the Tamagotchi 
as a digital companion that needs "virtual" care from them, while 
this particular plant-integrated textile requires physical care. P2, 
P6, and P7 all expressed concern about the health status of living 
plants during the three days. P5 has even been tracking the tallest 
sprout among all the ones on her wristband and expressed strong 
emotions when it fell of when she bumped into a friend. P2 also 
expressed her concern on day 1 when she noticed that the sprouts 
started wilting, yet was surprised that after one night of rest in 
sufcient moisture, they were able to grow taller visibly. P2 said, " I 
felt connected when I wake up and then see it’s [growing] really 
well, and then I feel it’s growing up with me somehow like I’m 
sleeping while it’s growing. " Several participants also observed the 
interaction between this plant and other species due to the close 
proximity, such as the curiosity from P6’s cat and the squirrels 
from P1’s backyard. This brings a diferent set of caring needs that 
common houseplants may not have. 
Cohabitation and caretaker behavior change: Most participants 
did not adjust their daily living environment to accommodate the 
living conditions of the plant-integrated textile. However, several 
participants actively sought the outdoors to expose the textiles to 
more sunlight, taking advantage of the mobility of the apparatus. 
For example, in Figure 10, P5 wears the samples while she is taking 
an outdoor walk, while P7 wears them while tending her own pro-
duce garden. The watering activity has also been blended into their 
daily routines. P4 connects the watering activity for plants with 
drinking water for himself, and he feels that they are collaboratively 
getting hydrated throughout this co-living experience. P4 refected 
that "The moment I water it, it also reminds me to drink water 
myself. So I feel that’s a really nice moment because I’m the person 
who never hydrates myself frequently. " P6 emphasized the sense of 
obligation she experiences, making her more conscious about her 
body movements and activities when wearing it. 
Unique aesthetics of plant-integrated textiles: When compar-
ing it to other clothing and accessories they have worn before, P6, 
P8, and P9 talked about how the textile’s unique look can become a 
fashion trend. P8 spoke about how she sees it as a statement piece 
that will only be worn on special occasions due to the needed care. 
The livingness of the plant signifcantly impacts the aesthetic of the 
wearable piece. P3 mentioned that the dead sprouts "look terrible" 
in comparison to the living sprouts, while P6 and P9 see the poten-
tial of it becoming an activity to educate people about caring for 
plants and nature in general through the desire to take care of this 
piece to look good fashion-wise. The statement piece can express 
one’s values and regard for nature while literally requiring care to 
maintain its aesthetic. P5 also expressed excitement about having 
clothing that would grow: "This one is a new type of clothing that’s 
been getting better since day one. So it could last longer with you 
unless they die out. " This growable aesthetic that requires close 
care allows for a new venue for self-expression. 
Observations on electronic integration to assist care: Partici-
pants used the moisture sensor hardware to a diferent extent during 
the process. Participants with limited plant-caring experience (P2, 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
P4, and P9) used the moisture sensor for additional support infor-
mation on when to water the plant. In contrast, more experienced 
participants P6, P7, and P10 only used the sensor as a benchmark on 
the frst day and were able to gauge the watering needs intuitively 
further on. The experienced plant-caring participants, such as P5, 
stated that she could "read the plants to know their needs" based 
on her experience. P1 said, "It was nice to have something decisive 
and quantifed (color-graded). " When we asked them about their 
opinion towards incorporating an integrated automated watering 
system, most participants said this could alleviate some of the car-
ing pressure as the sprouts need frequent watering. Participants 
were less concerned about a possible disconnection with the plant 
when the caring load is ofoaded. P1 stated, "I feel like the sense 
of closeness is probably mediated by the care you provide [to the 
plant]. And I think that care comes in a variety of ways, watering 
being just one of them. " 
7 Applications 
To explore the design opportunities of living plant-integrated tex-
tiles, we created fve sample applications using the LivingLoom care-
based fabrication approach. The application design ideas originated 
from user study interviews and rapid sampling in the prototyping 
phase. Each application explores diferent textile integration and 
electronic integration presented in the LivingLoom Design Space 
in Figure 4. Through the fve applications, we explore the symbi-
otic relationship between the wearer and the plants through the 
integration of plant-integrated textiles into everyday accessories 
and objects. 
Touch-sensing hairband to "feel" the plants (Figure 12). The 
hairband is constructed of twill-woven seed-integrated yarns with 
interlaced conductive threads. We utilize the conductivity of chia 
sprouts to function as a capacitive touch sensor. The chia sprout 
"sensors" are wired to a microcontroller with a disc vibration motor. 
When the wearers touch the sprouts, they will feel the haptic feed-
back from the vibration motor to experience the tactile sense of the 
plants as an extension of the human body and skin. This design 
facilitates a direct connection between the plant and the wearer, 
reinforcing the sense of the symbiotic relationship between them. 
Metal snap buttons are used as fasteners on the woven textile to 
attach them onto the hairband for wear. They can be taken of to 
lay fat for rest and growth. 
Self-caring hat (Figure 13). We wove a wafe weave hatband that 
can be attached to a hat to support self-caring capabilities. In this 
three-layer wafe weave structure, the seed-integrated hydrogel 
yarns are woven on the top layer, while a thin, fexible tube(ID 
1mm, OD 2mm, McMaster Carr 5233K111) is woven on the bottom 
layer. Along the tubing, we used a needle to pierce small holes to 
allow water to be sprayed through. This tubing is connected to 
a peristaltic liquid pump (Operation Voltage: 5V, Flow rate: up to 
100 mL/min). With an automatic irrigation system, this hat can 
ensure sufcient water intake for the chia seeds on a sunny day in 
an outdoor environment. We see an opportunity to integrate fow 
control systems such as FlowIO [86] to enable a variety of watering 
volumes for caring for various plant-integrated textiles. 
Figure 12: Touch-sensing hairband 
Figure 13: Self-caring hat 
Indoor garden throw pillow (Figure 14a): This application is 
an example of integrating seed-integrated hydrogel yarns for up-
holstery, combining two home decor elements—throw pillows and 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
Figure 14: (a) Indoor garden throw pillow; (b) Outdoor activity 
encouraging sandals; (c) Rattan woven bag. 
houseplants—into a single design. This application uses the sub-
strate lining technique for integrating seed-integrated hydrogel 
yarns. We used the couching stitch to tack the yarns onto a pre-
made throw pillow case. The yarns are only attached to the top 
area of the pillow so that the chia sprouts will not be pressed and 
harmed when humans are sitting against them. 
Outdoor activity encouraging sandals (Figure 14b): This ap-
plication explores the hybrid layering technique for integrating 
seed-integrated hydrogel yarns. We used the double weave tech-
nique to weave the seed-integrated hydrogel yarns on the top layer 
of the weave structure, with the bottom layer in wafe weave as a 
substrate to support the roots and provide water retention proper-
ties. The woven materials can be attached directly onto the sandals 
for growth, as the jelly sandals can withstand the moisture during 
the sprout and growth phase. The sandals are designed to encourage 
users to enjoy outdoor activities and facilitate plant growth, as both 
entities beneft from the fresh air and sunlight from the outdoor 
environment. This design aims for a shared healthy lifestyle for 
both the plant and the wearer. 
Rattan woven bag (Figure 14c): This application explores struc-
ture interlacing for inserting seed-integrated hydrogel yarns. Using 
basketry weaving techniques, we directly weave the seed-integrated 
hydrogel yarns into a pre-made rattan woven bag. The rattan woven 
structure provides sufcient airfow for the seeds to grow and ofers 
adequate room for roots to develop. However, as rattan material 
does not assist with water retention, the sprouts require frequent 
watering to grow, or a water-retaining insert can be added to the bag. 
This application explores the direct integration of seed-integrated 
hydrogel yarns into a non-textile soft structure for wearable pur-
poses, expanding the design space for new design opportunities. 
8 Discussion 
8.1 Refections on Care-based Fabrication 
8.1.1 Embracing Uncertainty. We explored care-based fabrication 
through the LivingLoom fabrication approach, integrating plant 
seeds into textiles. In this process, various elements and entities 
collaboratively form the outcome of the fabrication: the properties 
of the seeds, the weather, and the care of humans. We observed the 
uncertainty in such a process and saw an opportunity to embrace it 
as part of the fabrication journey. Even with the same seed choice, 
recipe formulation, and woven structure, unexpected events can 
signifcantly impact the growth of living plants. For example, during 
the sprouting phase, the placement and orientation of the container 
would alter the direction of root growth; during the growth phase, a 
cloudy or rainy day can slow down the desired growth pace signif-
cantly; during the user study, accidentally bumping the wristband 
into surrounded people may cause the decay of several sprouts. 
While we aimed to characterize the growth of the plant-integrated 
textiles through the caring process under controlled conditions, 
the variance in outcome still makes the material unpredictable in 
certain ways. Throughout this experiment, we sought to embrace 
the uncertainty of the fabrication process, giving agency to the 
natural behavior of living plants to collaboratively defne the fnal 
outcome. 
8.1.2 Temporality as a Design Element. The temporality of living 
materials challenges the standard design and fabrication practice, 
where designers and makers can create at their own pace. Con-
versely, the life cycle of the living materials is a prime driver of 
the maker’s design decisions. As sprouts visibly grow each day, the 
focus of design appreciation shifts from a single moment in time 
to an evolving, continuous timeline, where the dynamic nature of 
growth is an integral part of the design itself. A wearer, user, or 
audience encountering the plant at diferent times may have a com-
pletely diferent experience wearing and interacting with it due to 
its continued growth. The temporality also challenges designers to 
reshape their design process to accommodate the pace. For example, 
we explored the integration of the life cycle timeline to inform the 
design decision-making. Sometimes, certain design decisions, such 
as the choice of seeds that need a longer sprouting phase, must 
be modifed and adjusted to ensure adequate growth time after 
textile integration. This constant design exercise is unique to care-
based fabrications. Furthermore, due to the signifcant impact of 
weather on growth, we used weather as a decision-making element 
in choosing wearable form factors. For our user study which was 
conducted in late summer, we chose a wristband design that can 
be worn with short and long sleeves and chose microfeece as the 
band fabric for comfort and water repellency. However, in cooler 
or warmer weather, we may need to consider body locations that 
are not covered by clothing or may not cause a signifcant amount 
of sweat. 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
8.1.3 Mutual Collaboration in Designing with Other-than-human 
Living Beings. We diferentiate the care-based fabrication approach 
from traditional plant-shaping practices such as bonsai, in which 
we do not alter the living conditions of the plants merely for the 
purpose of human needs. We aim to establish mutual collaboration 
by providing nutrients and suitable ambient conditions to support 
the plant’s natural growth. Due to the unique stage of sprouting 
where seeds can self-source nutrients, seed-integrated hydrogel 
yarns with textile integration can provide them with proper living 
conditions. However, toward the end of the growth phase, the 
sprouts would require soil to develop their roots further and source 
additional nutrients. We defne this phase as the post-growth phase, 
where textiles can be potted into soil for continued growth. 
8.1.4 Symbiotic Companionship in Plant Life Cycle. We investi-
gated human-plant symbiosis through the care-based fabrication 
of living plants into (e-)textiles. This symbiosis can be observed 
throughout the life cycle of the plants. When the samples are fab-
ricated during their Seed Phase, each strand of yarn is handled 
carefully to avoid unexpected damage, such as extreme heat or 
unwanted moisture. This plays a role in preserving the livingness 
of the seeds. During the Growth Phase, we intentionally choose not 
to incorporate growth lights or temperature & humidity-controlled 
environments for a more controlled environment for chia seed 
sprouting. Instead, we have facilitated the seed growth in ambient 
conditions shared by the human. This cohabitation situation rein-
forces the refection of symbiosis and resonates with the notion of 
"companion species" by Donna Haraway [32]. During the Growth 
Phase, the daily observation ofered the authors and participants a 
close and emotional encounter, where the visible growth became 
an afrmation of the decent care that the plants received. Although 
care-based fabrication requires a substantial amount of caretaking, 
we observe that these intensive workloads are partially ofset by 
the companionship and emotional reward that plants ofer. This 
observation aligns with Maria Puig de la Bellacasa’s assertion that 
labor, afections, and ethics form the three dimensions of care [79]. 
When worn by participants, the companionship not only invited 
them to refect on their living conditions and daily behaviors but 
also reinforced the unconscious adjustment of the behavior due to 
the closeness and physical intimacy of the wearable form. 
8.2 Toward Sustainable Textiles 
8.2.1 Textile Caring for Sustainable Fashion. We view care-based 
fabrication as a path to foster alternative clothing-caring behaviors 
and promote sustainability. This new plant-clothing hybrid experi-
ence brought new perspectives for wearers to refect on the care for 
everyday clothing and accessories. Prior research has explored how 
garment mending and preparing practice can increase sustainable 
fashion awareness [24, 62]. We see an opportunity to integrate liv-
ing textiles into a sustainability practice to encourage close care for 
everyday clothing. The symbiotic relationship between humans and 
plants extends to this plant-textile hybrid, encouraging us to view 
textiles as dynamic and evolving entities rather than static objects. 
Just as textiles naturally experience wear and gradual deteriora-
tion, like how old jeans slowly adapt to the wearer’s body shape, 
these changes are often viewed as signs of destruction. However, 
our experience with growing and evolving alongside living textiles 
ofers a new appreciation for these transformations. By embracing 
the natural changes in textiles, we may encourage longer use and 
greater attachment to clothing items, extending their life cycle and 
supporting more sustainable practices. Furthermore, as refected 
by participants from the user study, the bodily extension aforded 
through wearable plants potentially provides a new aesthetic dimen-
sion that challenges current perceptions of fashion expression [3]. 
The wearable plant not only becomes a statement piece itself but 
also invites actions of care to reinforce the statement. 
8.2.2 Recyclability of Electronics Integration. We explored care-
based electronic integration through user study apparatus and ex-
ample applications. When designing these samples, we meticulously 
chose the interaction that follows the care-based electronic inte-
gration guidelines in Section 4.3 to center the interaction around 
plant caring. However, we acknowledge that the integration of 
electronics may hinder the recyclability of living textiles due to the 
mix of non-recyclable materials from the electronics. To address 
this challenge, for the user study apparatus (Figure 9), we intention-
ally designed the e-textile moisture sensors to be separated from 
the living textile rather than weaving insulated conductive threads 
into the living textile. The living textile can be detached from the 
wristband and then decomposed or potted in soil. Although this 
approach is less integrated, the detachable feature allows for better 
recyclability to achieve end-of-life decomposability. However, the 
two examples of tubing applications (Figure 13) or woven conduc-
tive thread (Figure 12) need to be disassembled at the end of life 
to separate non-biodegradable materials. This inevitably increases 
the challenge of recycling. For future work, it is worth exploring 
biodegradable electronic materials from prior work [47, 90, 101] for 
fully integrated biodegradability or using interactive materials with 
sensing function through chemically activated colorimetric sensing 
or shape-changing that does not require electronics integration[43]. 
8.3 Limitations and Future Work 
We explore integrating microgreen seeds into textiles to examine 
care-based fabrications. We summarized and characterized the life 
cycle of the plant-integrated textiles with a focus on the initial 
ten days. However, the plants can continuously grow past these 
ten days and into the post-growth phase. We acknowledge that 
while our work provides initial insights into wearing and caring for 
textile-integrated living plants, the limited time frame we focus on 
may not fully refect the natural life cycle of chia plants. Future work 
would be fruitful in examining the full life cycle of plant-integrated 
textiles. 
We see an opportunity to explore other seed types at various di-
mensions and growing conditions. We chose chia seeds due to their 
wide availability, hydroponic growth compatibility, and compatible 
sizes for wet spinning. To this end, we have conducted early ex-
ploration on casting larger-sized seeds unsuitable for wet-spinning 
(e.g., Red Cabbage and Mustard) into bioplastic sheets to observe 
their growth. However, thoroughly dried seed-integrated bioplas-
tics sheets require a signifcant amount of water compared to the 
yarn forms adopted in LivingLoom, making sufcient rehydration 
to support seed growth more challenging. We also see the potential 
of other plants at various growth stages, which may reduce the 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
challenge of seed germination as the frst step. For example, moss 
has a low profle that has less protrusion from the body surface. 
Furthermore, future work could expand the exploration of the 
infuence of textile integration on the material property of living 
textiles. Diferent weave structure density, foating weft and warp 
length, and material combinations may result in diferences in 
water absorption, water retention, and structural support for roots 
to develop. The expansion of structural exploration may provide 
more insights into the precise design of living textiles. 
Our user study is designed for a three-day duration to probe 
participants’ caring behavior towards plant-integrated textiles. The 
time length is comparatively short in comparison to some other 
studies with living organisms such as cyanobacteria [100] and slime 
mold [59]. This is due to the frequent care needed for the micro-
greens (compared to the more passive care needed for cyanobacteria 
and slime mold), which may cause participant fatigue and a higher 
decaying rate. However, with a diferent apparatus confguration, 
such as a portable integrated watering system or protective cover 
for the plants when wearing, we see an opportunity to extend the 
study to a longer period, which may provide further insight in the 
caring and wearing of living textiles. 
9 Conclusion 
In this paper, we introduced a care-based fabrication approach, in-
tegrating living materials into the textile-making process and posi-
tioning care as a fundamental consideration in fabrication decisions. 
We present the LivingLoom fabrication approach, demonstrating 
how plant-integrated textiles can cultivate a symbiotic relationship 
between the maker, the wearer, and the plant. We explore a design 
space consisting of seed-integrated hydrogel yarns and textile in-
tegration to support the growth of living plants. We summarize 
LivingLoom plant-integrated textiles into a life cycle and exam-
ine the distinct care required at diferent stages of plant growth. 
Through our fve sample applications, we explored the LivingLoom 
care-based fabrication approach through embroidery and weaving 
and explored the compatibility of seed-integrated hydrogel yarns 
with pre-made accessories. 
To explore how people wear and care for living plant-integrated 
textiles, we conducted a user study with 10 participants living and 
caring for living textile apparatuses for three consecutive days. 
The study discovers unique caring experiences for the wearer as a 
caregiver and the intimate relationship formed between the plant 
and the wearer. The aesthetic and sensory qualities of these textiles 
also opened up new avenues for wearable design. 
Care-based fabrication ofers a framework for embracing the un-
predictability inherent in working with living organisms, position-
ing them as collaborators in the creative process. This plant-textile 
hybrid challenges conventional approaches to garment care and en-
courages more sustainable design and care practices. By rethinking 
care in this way, we envision a future where textiles become more 
than static objects but dynamic ecosystems that refect an intimate 
relationship between humans, plants, and other living beings we 
cohabit with. 
Acknowledgments 
We sincerely thank the user study participants for their care for the 
plants and the reviewers for their valuable and supportive feedback. 
Special thanks to Alicia Chu for modeling, Yingjie Bei for photog-
raphy, and Lily Winagle for early explorations. This project was 
supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant IIS-2047249), 
the Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability Academic Venture 
Fund, and the Cornell College of Human Ecology Faculty Sustain-
ability Research Grant. 
References 
[1] Jonathan Anderson. 2023. LOEWE Spring Summer 2023 Men’s Col-
lection. https://www.loewe.com/on/demandware.store/Sites-LOE_USA-
Site/en_US/Page-Show. (accessed 2024-12-03). 
[2] Shyam Barampuram, George Allen, and Sergei Krasnyanski. 2014. Efect of 
Various Sterilization Procedures on the in Vitro Germination of Cotton Seeds. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture (PCTOC) 118, 1 (July 2014), 179–185. doi:10. 
1007/s11240-014-0472-x 
[3] Malcolm Barnard. 2003. Fashion as Communication (2 ed.). Routledge, London. 
doi:10.4324/9781315013084 
[4] Fiona Bell, Latifa Al Naimi, Ella McQuaid, and Mirela Alistar. 2022. Designing 
with Alganyl. In Sixteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and 
Embodied Interaction (TEI ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3490149.3501308 
[5] Fiona Bell, Derrek Chow, Hyelin Choi, and Mirela Alistar. 2023. SCOBY BREAST-
PLATE: SLOWLY GROWING A MICROBIAL INTERFACE. In Proceedings of 
the Seventeenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied 
Interaction (TEI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–15. doi:10.1145/3569009.3572805 
[6] Fiona Bell, Joshua Cofe, and Mirela Alistar. 2024. Bio-Digital Calendar: Attun-
ing to Nonhuman Temporalities for Multispecies Understanding. In Proceedings 
of the Eighteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied 
Interaction (TEI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–15. doi:10.1145/3623509.3633386 
[7] Fiona Bell, Netta Ofer, and Mirela Alistar. 2022. ReClaym Our Compost: 
Biodegradable Clay for Intimate Making. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22). Association for Com-
puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. doi:10.1145/3491102.3517711 
[8] Fiona Bell, Michelle Ramsahoye, Joshua Cofe, Julia Tung, and Mirela Alistar. 
2023. µMe: Exploring the Human Microbiome as an Intimate Material for 
Living Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems 
Conference (DIS ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
2019–2033. doi:10.1145/3563657.3596133 
[9] Divyanshu Bhardwaj, Alexander Ponticello, Shreya Tomar, Adrian Dabrowski, 
and Katharina Krombholz. 2024. In Focus, Out of Privacy: The Wearer’s Per-
spective on the Privacy Dilemma of Camera Glasses. In Proceedings of the CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642242 
[10] Eli Blevis. 2007. Sustainable Interaction Design: Invention & Disposal, Renewal 
& Reuse. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’07). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
503–512. doi:10.1145/1240624.1240705 
[11] Patrizia Bolzan, Daria Casciani, and Arianna Regaglia. 2022. New Perspectives 
in Fashion Sustainability through the Use of Bacterial Cellulose. In DRS Biennial 
Conference Series (DRS2022). Design Research Society, London, UK, 1–21. doi:10. 
21606/drs.2022.793 
[12] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using Thematic Analysis in Psychol-
ogy. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (Jan. 2006), 77–101. doi:10.1191/ 
1478088706qp063oa 
[13] Rosie Broadhead, Laure Craeye, and Chris Callewaert. 2021. The Future of 
Functional Clothing for an Improved Skin and Textile Microbiome Relationship. 
Microorganisms 9, 6 (June 2021), 1192. doi:10.3390/microorganisms9061192 
[14] Anqi Cai, Zahra Abdali, Dalia Jane Saldanha, Masoud Aminzare, and Noémie-
Manuelle Dorval Courchesne. 2023. Endowing Textiles with Self-Repairing 
Ability through the Fabrication of Composites with a Bacterial Bioflm. Scientifc 
Reports 13, 1 (July 2023), 11389. doi:10.1038/s41598-023-38501-2 
[15] Michelle Chang, Chenyi Shen, Aditi Maheshwari, Andreea Danielescu, and 
Lining Yao. 2022. Patterns and Opportunities for the Design of Human-Plant 
Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Con-
ference (DIS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
925–948. doi:10.1145/3532106.3533555 
[16] H. J. Chen, P. Y. Lee, C. Y. Chen, S. L. Huang, B. W. Huang, F. J. Dai, C. F. Chau, 
C. S. Chen, and Y. S. Lin. 2022. Moisture Retention of Glycerin Solutions with 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Zhu, et al. 
Various Concentrations: A Comparative Study. Scientifc Reports 12, 1 (June 
2022), 10232. doi:10.1038/s41598-022-13452-2 
[17] Yuning Chen and Larissa Pschetz. 2024. Microbial Revolt: Redefning Biolab 
Tools and Practices for More-than-Human Care Ecologies. In Proceedings of the 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3613904. 
3641981 
[18] Tingyu Cheng, Gregory D. Abowd, Hyunjoo Oh, and Josiah Hester. 2023. Tran-
sient Internet of Things: Redesigning the Lifetime of Electronics for a More 
Sustainable Networked Environment. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on 
Sustainable Computer Systems (HotCarbon ’23). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3604930.3605723 
[19] Jia May Chin, Yau Yan Lim, and Adeline Su Yien Ting. 2021. Biopolymers 
for Biopriming of Brassica Rapa Seeds: A Study on Coating Efcacy, Bioagent 
Viability and Seed Germination. Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural 
Sciences 20, 3 (April 2021), 198–207. doi:10.1016/j.jssas.2021.01.006 
[20] Nicola Coppedè, Michela Janni, Manuele Bettelli, Calogero Leandro Maida, 
Francesco Gentile, Marco Villani, Roberta Ruotolo, Salvatore Iannotta, Nel-
son Marmiroli, Marta Marmiroli, and Andrea Zappettini. 2017. An in Vivo 
Biosensing, Biomimetic Electrochemical Transistor with Applications in Plant 
Science and Precision Farming. Scientifc Reports 7, 1 (Nov. 2017), 16195. 
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-16217-4 
[21] Laura Devendorf, Abigail De Kosnik, Kate Mattingly, and Kimiko Ryokai. 2016. 
Probing the Potential of Post-Anthropocentric 3D Printing. In Proceedings of 
the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ’16). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 170–181. doi:10.1145/2901790. 
2901879 
[22] Kristin N. Dew and Daniela K. Rosner. 2018. Lessons from the Woodshop: Culti-
vating Design with Living Materials. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174159 
[23] Maula Yasinta Dewi and Amir Husni. 2020. Characterization of Biobased Algi-
nate/Glycerol/ Sunfower Oil as Biodegradable Packaging. E3S Web of Confer-
ences 147 (2020), 03004. doi:10.1051/e3sconf/202014703004 
[24] Marium Durrani. 2018. “People Gather for Stranger Things, So Why Not This?” 
Learning Sustainable Sensibilities through Communal Garment-Mending Prac-
tices. Sustainability 10, 7 (July 2018), 2218. doi:10.3390/su10072218 
[25] B. Esponnette. 2016. Elizabeth Esponnette Harnesses Nature to Grow Wearable 
Chia Vest. https://www.designboom.com/design/elizabeth-esponnette-chia-
vest-03-01-2016/. (accessed 2024-12-03). 
[26] Saikat Gantait, Suprabuddha Kundu, Lucina Yeasmin, and Md. Nasim Ali. 2017. 
Impact of Diferential Levels of Sodium Alginate, Calcium Chloride and Basal 
Media on Germination Frequency of Genetically True Artifcial Seeds of Rau-
volfa Serpentina(L.) Benth. Ex Kurz. Journal of Applied Research on Medicinal 
and Aromatic Plants 4 (March 2017), 75–81. doi:10.1016/j.jarmap.2017.01.005 
[27] Gilad Gome, Yuval Fein, Julian Waksberg, Yuval Maayan, Andrey Grishko, 
Iddo Yehoshua Wald, and Oren Zuckerman. 2019. My First Biolab: A System for 
Hands-On Biology Experiments. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’19). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1145/3290607.3313081 
[28] Gilad Gome, Julian Waksberg, Andrey Grishko, Iddo Yehoshua Wald, and Oren 
Zuckerman. 2019. OpenLH: Open Liquid-Handling System for Creative Experi-
mentation with Biology. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference 
on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’19). Association for Com-
puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 55–64. doi:10.1145/3294109.3295619 
[29] Sofía Guridi, Matteo Iannacchero, and Emmi Pouta. 2024. Towards More Sus-
tainable Interactive Textiles: A Literature Review on The Use of Biomaterials for 
eTextiles.. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–19. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642581 
[30] Sofía Guridi, Emmi Pouta, Ari Hokkanen, and Aayush Jaiswal. 2023. LIGHT 
TISSUE: Development of Cellulose-Based Optical Textile Sensors. In Proceedings 
of the Seventeenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied 
Interaction (TEI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–14. doi:10.1145/3569009.3572798 
[31] Lone Koefoed Hansen and Margrete Lodahl Rolighed. 2024. Encountering 
Human-Plant Relations: A Discussion of How Interaction Design Can Encourage 
Human Sensibility to More-than-human Plants. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1400–1411. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661586 
[32] Donna J. Haraway. 2003. The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and 
Signifcant Otherness. Prickly Paradigm Press, Chicago, Illinois. 
[33] Brendan Alexander Harmon, Hye Yeon Nam, Hunter Gilbert, and Nasrin Iravani. 
2022. Living Typography: Robotically Printing a Living Typeface. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–4. 
doi:10.1145/3491101.3519894 
[34] David R. Hershey. 1995. Don’t Just Pet Your Chia. Science Activities 32, 2 (June 
1995), 8–12. doi:10.1080/00368121.1995.10113179 
[35] Zena Holloway. 2024. Bio-Designer, Maker & Photographer. 
https://zenaholloway.com. (accessed 2024-11-26). 
[36] Yuhan Hu, Jasmine Lu, Nathan Scinto-Madonich, Miguel Alfonso Pineros, Pedro 
Lopes, and Guy Hofman. 2024. Designing Plant-Driven Actuators for Robots 
to Grow, Age, and Decay. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference (DIS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 2481–2496. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661519 
[37] Yuta Ikeya and Bahareh Barati. 2023. Designing an Algal Relay Computer: A 
Critical Orientation in Exploring More-than-Human Temporality. In Extended 
Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. 
doi:10.1145/3544549.3585874 
[38] Yuta Ikeya, Ron Wakkary, and Bahareh Barati. 2023. Metamorphonic: A Re-
fective Design Inquiry into Human-Silkworm Relationship. In Proceedings of 
the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 808–819. doi:10.1145/3563657. 
3596053 
[39] T. Ingold. 2010. The Textility of Making. Cambridge Journal of Economics 34, 1 
(Jan. 2010), 91–102. doi:10.1093/cje/bep042 
[40] Sylvia Janicki, Nassim Parvin, and Noura Howell. 2024. Crip Refections on 
Designing with Plants: Intersecting Disability Theory, Chronic Illness, and 
More-than-Human Design. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference (DIS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 1044–1058. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661509 
[41] Heekyoung Jung and Erik Stolterman. 2010. Material Probe: Exploring Materi-
ality of Digital Artifacts. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’11). ACM, Funchal, Portugal, 
153–156. doi:10.1145/1935701.1935731 
[42] Romy Kaiser, Ben Bridgens, Elise Elsacker, and Jane Scott. 2023. BioKnit: Devel-
opment of Mycelium Paste for Use with Permanent Textile Formwork. Frontiers 
in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 11 (July 2023), 01. doi:10.3389/fbioe.2023. 
1229693 
[43] Viirj Kan, Emma Vargo, Noa Machover, Hiroshi Ishii, Serena Pan, Weixuan Chen, 
and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2017. Organic Primitives: Synthesis and Design of pH-
Reactive Materials Using Molecular I/O for Sensing, Actuation, and Interaction. 
In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 989–1000. 
doi:10.1145/3025453.3025952 
[44] Elvin Karana, Bahareh Barati, and Elisa Giaccardi. 2020. Living Artefacts: Con-
ceptualizing Livingness as a Material Quality in Everyday Artefacts. Interna-
tional Journal of Design 14, 3 (2020), 37–53. 
[45] Svenja Keune. 2018. On Textile Farming: Seeds as a Material for Textile Design. 
[46] Carl Knappett and Lambros Malafouris. 2008. Material Agency: Towards a 
Non-Anthropocentric Approach. Springer Science & Business Media, New York, 
NY. 
[47] Marion Koelle, Madalina Nicolae, Aditya Shekhar Nittala, Marc Teyssier, and 
Jürgen Steimle. 2022. Prototyping Soft Devices with Interactive Bioplastics. In 
Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 
Technology (UIST ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3526113.3545623 
[48] Stacey Kuznetsov, Cassandra Barrett, Piyum Fernando, and Kat Fowler. 2018. 
Antibiotic-Responsive Bioart: Exploring DIYbio as a Design Studio Practice. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. 
doi:10.1145/3173574.3174037 
[49] Stacey Kuznetsov, Carrie Doonan, Nathan Wilson, Swarna Mohan, Scott E. 
Hudson, and Eric Paulos. 2015. DIYbio Things: Open Source Biology Tools as 
Platforms for Hybrid Knowledge Production and Scientifc Participation. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
4065–4068. doi:10.1145/2702123.2702235 
[50] Stacey Kuznetsov, Will Harrigan-Anderson, Haakon Faste, Scott E. Hudson, and 
Eric Paulos. 2013. Community Engagements with Living Sensing Systems. In 
Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition (C&amp;C ’13). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 213–222. doi:10. 
1145/2466627.2466638 
[51] Marios C. Kyriacou, Youssef Rouphael, Francesco Di Gioia, Angelos Kyratzis, 
Francesco Serio, Massimiliano Renna, Stefania De Pascale, and Pietro Santamaria. 
2016. Micro-Scale Vegetable Production and the Rise of Microgreens. Trends in 
Food Science & Technology 57 (Nov. 2016), 103–115. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2016.09.005 
[52] Eldy S. Lazaro Vasquez, Mirela Alistar, Laura Devendorf, and Michael L. Rivera. 
2024. Desktop Biofbers Spinning: An Open-Source Machine for Exploring 
Biobased Fibers and Their Application Towards Sustainable Smart Textile De-
sign. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1–18. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642387 
LivingLoom CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
[53] Eldy S. Lazaro Vasquez, Netta Ofer, Shanel Wu, Mary Etta West, Mirela Alistar, 
and Laura Devendorf. 2022. Exploring Biofoam as a Material for Tangible 
Interaction. In Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1525–1539. doi:10.1145/3532106. 
3533494 
[54] Min Lei, Yuling Li, Yanping Liu, Yanxue Ma, Longdi Cheng, and Yue Hu. 2020. 
Efect of Weaving Structures on the Water Wicking–Evaporating Behavior of 
Woven Fabrics. Polymers 12, 2 (Feb. 2020), 422. doi:10.3390/polym12020422 
[55] Andrea Shin Ling. 2018. Design by Decay, Decay by Design. Thesis. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
[56] Jen Liu, Daragh Byrne, and Laura Devendorf. 2018. Design for Collaborative 
Survival: An Inquiry into Human-Fungi Relationships. In Proceedings of the 2018 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18, Vol. 2018-April). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. doi:10.1145/ 
3173574.3173614 
[57] Szu-Yu (Cyn) Liu, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2019. Symbiotic 
Encounters: HCI and Sustainable Agriculture. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. doi:10.1145/3290605.3300547 
[58] Jasmine Lu. 2024. Empowering End-Users Toward Roles in Sustainable Com-
puting. In Companion Publication of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems 
Conference (DIS ’24 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 55–58. doi:10.1145/3656156.3665131 
[59] Jasmine Lu and Pedro Lopes. 2022. Integrating Living Organisms in Devices 
to Implement Care-based Interactions. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’22). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. doi:10.1145/3526113.3545629 
[60] Qiuyu Lu, Lydia Yang, Aditi Maheshwari, Hengrong Ni, Tianyu Yu, Jianzhe 
Gu, Advait Wadhwani, Haiqing Xu, Andreea Danielescu, and Lining Yao. 2024. 
Guttation Sensor: Wearable Microfuidic Chip for Plant Condition Monitoring 
and Diagnosis. In Extended Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–9. doi:10.1145/3613905.3651087 
[61] Donna Maione. 2023. Recrafting Textile Futures: Caring and Repairing as a Way 
to Design. In Textile Intersections 2023. Design Research Society, London, UK, 
1–17. doi:10.21606/TI-2023/122 
[62] Lisa S. McNeill, Robert P. Hamlin, Rachel H. McQueen, Lauren Degenstein, 
Tony C. Garrett, Linda Dunn, and Sarah Wakes. 2020. Fashion Sensitive Young 
Consumers and Fashion Garment Repair: Emotional Connections to Garments 
as a Sustainability Strategy. International Journal of Consumer Studies 44, 4 
(2020), 361–368. doi:10.1111/ijcs.12572 
[63] Galina Mihaleva, Abigail Dalton, Mary Fitzgerald, and Abhik Chowdhury. 2023. 
Haikeus: Transmuting Ecological Grieving into Action. In Adjunct Proceedings 
of the 2023 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing & the 2023 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computing 
(UbiComp/ISWC ’23 Adjunct). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 301–303. doi:10.1145/3594739.3610784 
[64] William Myers and Paola Antonelli. 2012. Bio Design: Nature, Science, Creativity
(revised and expanded edition, reprinted ed.). Thames & Hudson, London. 
[65] Hye Yeon Nam, JaNiece Campbell, Andrew M. Webb, and Brendan Harmon. 
2023. FloraWear: Wearable Living Interface. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth 
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI 
’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. doi:10. 
1145/3569009.3572801 
[66] Audrey Ng. 2017. Grown Microbial 3D Fiber Art, Ava: Fusion of Traditional Art 
with Technology. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Symposium on 
Wearable Computers (ISWC ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 209–214. doi:10.1145/3123021.3123069 
[67] Iohanna Nicenboim, Doenja Oogjes, Heidi Biggs, and Seowoo Nam. 2023. 
Decentering Through Design: Bridging Posthuman Theory with More-than-
Human Design Practices. Human–Computer Interaction 0, 0 (Nov. 2023), 1–26. 
doi:10.1080/07370024.2023.2283535 
[68] Madalina Nicolae, Claire Lefez, Anne Roudaut, Samuel Huron, Jürgen Steimle, 
and Marc Teyssier. 2024. SoftBioMorph: Fabricating Sustainable Shape-changing 
Interfaces Using Soft Biopolymers. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing 
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 496–508. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661610 
[69] Madalina Nicolae, Vivien Roussel, Marion Koelle, Samuel Huron, Jürgen Steimle, 
and Marc Teyssier. 2023. Biohybrid Devices: Prototyping Interactive Devices 
with Growable Materials. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606774 
[70] Charlotte Nordmoen and Andrew P. McPherson. 2022. Making Space for Ma-
terial Entanglements: A Difractive Analysis of Woodwork and the Practice 
of Making an Interactive System. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Designing 
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 415–423. doi:10.1145/3532106.3533572 
[71] William Odom, Ron Wakkary, Jeroen Hol, Bram Naus, Pepijn Verburg, Tal 
Amram, and Amy Yo Sue Chen. 2019. Investigating Slowness as a Frame to 
Design Longer-Term Experiences with Personal Data: A Field Study of Olly. In 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. 
doi:10.1145/3290605.3300264 
[72] Netta Ofer and Mirela Alistar. 2024. Tracing as a Strategy for Orienting to 
Nonhuman Perspectives. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive 
Systems Conference (DIS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 1087–1100. doi:10.1145/3643834.3661621 
[73] Gizem Oktay, Yuta Ikeya, Minha Lee, Bahareh Barati, Youngsil Lee, Yuning 
Chen, Larissa Pschetz, and Carolina Ramirez-Figueroa. 2023. Designing with 
the More-than-Human: Temporalities of Thinking with Care. In Companion 
Publication of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23 
Companion). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 104– 
106. doi:10.1145/3563703.3591462 
[74] Doenja Oogjes and Audrey Desjardins. 2024. A Temporal Vocabulary of Design 
Events for Research through Design. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642560 
[75] Nathalie Overdevest, Rakesh Patibanda, Aryan Saini, Elise Van Den Hoven, 
and Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller. 2023. Towards Designing for Everyday Embodied 
Remembering: Findings from a Diary Study. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’23). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2611–2624. doi:10.1145/3563657.3595999 
[76] B. Ozipek and H. Karakas. 2014. Wet Spinning of Synthetic Polymer Fibers. 
In Advances in Filament Yarn Spinning of Textiles and Polymers. Woodhead 
Publishing, Sawston, United Kingdom, 174–186. doi:10.1533/9780857099174.2. 
174 
[77] Pat Pataranutaporn, Angela Vujic, David S. Kong, Pattie Maes, and Misha Sra. 
2020. Living Bits: Opportunities and Challenges for Integrating Living Mi-
croorganisms in Human-Computer Interaction. In Proceedings of the Augmented 
Humans International Conference (AHs ’20). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3384657.3384783 
[78] Larissa Pschetz, Keili Koppel, and Michelle Bastian. 2024. Design for Temporal 
Cohabitation. In Extended Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3613905.3644068 
[79] María Puig de la Bellacasa. 2017. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More 
than Human Worlds. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, USA. 
jstor:10.5749/j.ctt1mmfspt 
[80] Sven Quadfieg. 2021. Post-Anthropocentric Design: The Problem of Optimizing 
the Relationship between Humans and Nature. In Pluriversal Design Conference 
Series (Pivot 2021). Design Research Society, London, UK, 189–195. 
[81] William P Rey, Jezel D Gonzales, Joaquin Miguel F Gonzales, and Eugene B 
Seguin. 2024. AutoGardener: A Web-Based Application for Smart-Urban Gar-
dening. In Proceedings of the 2024 10th International Conference on Computing 
and Data Engineering (ICCDE ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 98–104. doi:10.1145/3641181.3641197 
[82] Shannon Rodgers, Kellie Vella, Bernd Ploderer, and Margot Brereton. 2023. 
Nature Fictions: Designing for a Sustainable Future through Nature Relations. 
In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS 
’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1566–1580. 
doi:10.1145/3563657.3595981 
[83] Margrete Lodahl Rolighed, Ester Marie Aagaard, Marcus Due Jensen, Raune 
Frankjaer, and Lone Koefoed Hansen. 2022. Plant Radio: Tuning in to Plants by 
Combining Posthumanism and Design. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Designing 
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 666–676. doi:10.1145/3532106.3533517 
[84] Sail, El Rharras, Saadane, Chehri, and Wahbi. 2024. IoT Based Hydroponics : A 
Comparative Review. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Net-
working, Intelligent Systems and Security (NISS ’24). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3659677.3659710 
[85] Diana Scherer. 2024. Diana Scherer. https://dianascherer.nl/. (accessed 2024-12-
03). 
[86] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Rasp-
berry Pi” for Soft Robotics. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’21). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1145/3411763.3451513 
[87] Dawid Skrzypczak, Łukasz Jarzembowski, Grzegorz Izydorczyk, Katarzyna 
Mikula, Viktoria Hoppe, Karolina Anna Mielko, Natalia Pudełko-Malik, Piotr 
Młynarz, Katarzyna Chojnacka, and Anna Witek-Krowiak. 2021. Hydrogel 
Alginate Seed Coating as an Innovative Method for Delivering Nutrients at the 
Early Stages of Plant Growth. Polymers 13, 23 (Dec. 2021), 4233. doi:10.3390/ 
polym13234233 
[88] Nancy Smith, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jefrey Bardzell. 2017. Designing for 
Cohabitation: Naturecultures, Hybrids, and Decentering the Human in Design. 
In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan 
(CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1714–1725. 
doi:10.1145/3025453.3025948 
[89] Katherine W Song, Fiona Bell, Himani Deshpande, Ilan Mandel, Tifany Wun, 
Mirela Alistar, Leah Buechley, Wendy Ju, Jeeeun Kim, Eric Paulos, Samar Sabie, 
and Ron Wakkary. 2024. Sustainable Unmaking: Designing for Biodegradation, 
Decay, and Disassembly. In Extended Abstracts of the 2024 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–7. doi:10.1145/3613905.3636300 
[90] Katherine Wei Song and Eric Paulos. 2023. Vim: Customizable, Decomposable 
Electrical Energy Storage. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581110 
[91] Oscar Tomico, Ron Wakkary, and Kristina Andersen. 2023. Living-with and 
Designing-with Plants. Interactions 30, 1 (Jan. 2023), 30–34. doi:10.1145/3571589 
[92] Elizabeth Tsai, Michal Firstenberg, Jared Laucks, Yoav Sterman, Benjamin 
Lehnert, and Neri Oxman. 2013. CNSILK: Spider-silk Inspired Robotic Fab-
rication of Woven Habitats. In Rob | Arch 2012. Springer, Vienna, 161–166. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-7091-1465-0_17 
[93] PAULA ULARGUI. 2024. PA X NATURE — Paula.Ulargui.Escalona. 
https://paulaularguiescalona.com/PA-X-NATURE. (accessed 2024-12-03). 
[94] Eldy S. Lazaro Vasquez and Katia Vega. 2019. Myco-Accessories: Sustainable 
Wearables with Biodegradable Materials. In Proceedings of the 23rd International 
Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC ’19). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 306–311. doi:10.1145/3341163.3346938 
Zhu, et al. 
[95]
 Ron Wakkary. 2021. Things We Could Design: For More Than Human-Centered 
Worlds. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
[96] Beth Williams. 2024. Beth Williams. https://www.instagram.com/beexbeth/. 
(accessed 2024-12-03). 
[97] Diana Wyman. 2021. Designing to Biodegrade. 
[98] Lining Yao, Jifei Ou, Chin-Yi Cheng, Helene Steiner, Wen Wang, Guanyun 
Wang, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2015. bioLogic: Natto Cells as Nanoactuators for Shape 
Changing Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. doi:10.1145/2702123.2702611 
[99] Xinlin Zhao, Xiuye Wei, Yuan Guo, Caisheng Qiu, Songhua Long, Yufu Wang, 
and Huajiao Qiu. 2022. Industrial Hemp—an Old but Versatile Bast Fiber Crop. 
Journal of Natural Fibers 19, 13 (Dec. 2022), 6269–6282. doi:10.1080/15440478. 
2021.1907834 
[100] Jiwei Zhou, Zjenja Doubrovski, Elisa Giaccardi, and Elvin Karana. 2024. Living 
with Cyanobacteria: Exploring Materiality in Caring for Microbes in Everyday 
Life. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–20. 
doi:10.1145/3613904.3642039 
[101] Jingwen Zhu, Lily Winagle, and Kao Cindy Hsin-Liu. 2024. EcoThreads: 
Prototyping Biodegradable E-textiles Through Thread-based Fabrication. In 
Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–17. 
doi:10.1145/3613904.3642718 