466 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fluidic Control of Untethered Underwater
Soft Robots
Allyson E. Chen , Iman Adibnazari , George Nakoud, Giovanni Torres,
and Michael T. Tolley , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract—Soft robots offer considerable advantages relative to
traditional, rigid robots, including: versatility, safety, and rich
dynamic behavior . A common approach for actuating soft robots
is to use pumps and valves to control pressures and ﬂow rates
through ﬂuidic channels embedded in a soft material, to cause
desired deformations. Usually, an electronic control board carries
the pumps, valves, and other components to control this ﬂuid ﬂow.
Currently, many existing hydraulic control systems are designed
with application-speciﬁc performance requirements, forcing re-
searchers to either invest substantial time and effort into developing
custom hardware or constrain their soft robotic systems to the
limitations of available control platforms. To address these issues,
we present an approach to controlling soft robots underwater
that can be achieved with a compact, hydraulic control system.
We demonstrate this approach with hardware design housed in
a 3D-printable enclosure that is water-resistant up to 1 m for
30 min. The system features three independently controlled pumps,
each capable of reversible actuation, with a combined maximum
pressure of 0.9 MPa and a maximum ﬂow rate of 3.6 L/min.
Additionally, we present an approach to ﬂow sensing using onboard
RPM sensors, which avoids adding impedance to the ﬂuid channels
and, when combined with our direct pump drive approach, enables
precise and simultaneous control of multiple soft actuators. This
system offers an accessible platform to accelerate the development
of future underwater soft robots.
Index Terms —Soft robot applications, modeling, control, and
learning for soft robots, soft sensors and actuators.
I. I NTRODUCTION
S
OFT roboticists take inspiration from nature to design
robots with compliant materials, leveraging embodied in-
telligence to enhance various performance metrics (e.g., robust-
ness, safety, efﬁciency). In particular, new robot designs are
Received 12 July 2025; accepted 22 October 2025. Date of publication 13
November 2025; date of current version 24 November 2025. This article was
recommended for publication by Associate Editor J. Qu and Editor B. Mazzolai
upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported in part by
the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under
Grant DGE-2038238 and in part by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research under Grant
N00014-22-1-2595. (Corresponding author: Michael T. Tolley.)
Allyson E. Chen, Iman Adibnazari, George Nakoud, and Giovanni Torres
are with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University
of California, San Diego, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: aechen@ucsd.edu; iadibnaz
@ucsd.edu; gnakoud@ucsd.edu; gitorres@ucsd.edu).
Michael T. Tolley is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093 USA, and also
with the Materials Science and Engineering Program, University of California,
San Diego, CA 92093 USA (e-mail: tolley@ucsd.edu).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2025.3632714, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2025.3632714
needed for underwater environments, for various applications
including search-and-rescue [1], archaeology [2], deep-sea ex-
ploration [3], and mitigating the impacts of climate change [4].
Fortunately, there are nearly 1 million marine species to draw
inspiration from [5], most of which have evolved adaptations
that leverage varying material properties to achieve their goals.
Among these adaptations, locomotion strategies stand out as key
examples of how marine species interact with their environment
to achieve efﬁcient movement. The most well-known method of
movement leverages interactions between a soft body and the
surrounding ﬂuid (e.g., between the bodies of ﬁsh and ocean
water). Alternatively, some marine species, such as starﬁsh and
sea cucumbers, use internal ﬂuid to transmit muscle actuation
to their soft limbs to move across the ocean ﬂoor. Although the
latter is not the most common actuation mode in marine species,
for soft robots, this represents a versatile method of actuation
that allows for fast motion and large displacements [6], [7].
To implement bioinspired locomotion strategies in under-
water environments, effective actuation methods are essential.
While pneumatic systems are commonly used in soft robotics,
they use air which is compressible, and can thus introduce
unwanted buoyancy changes underwater, complicating control.
In contrast, hydraulic actuation with incompressible liquids is
better suited for underwater environments due to its more stable
and efﬁcient force transmission [8].
Hydraulic actuation offers advantages for underwater soft
robots, but requires signiﬁcant design consideration for effective
operation. Currently, hydraulic control systems for soft robots
vary in design, ranging from tethered systems [9], [10] to un-
tethered, application-speciﬁc systems[11], [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17]. Tethered systems typically consist of one pump and
a set of valves connected through a long tether. These systems
can be designed with extreme pressure and ﬂow rates that far
exceed the system requirements and facilitate quick testing but
introduce delays, pressure losses, and mobility restrictions as
tether length increases [18].
Untethered systems can overcome these limitations, but are
often labor-intensive to design and lack the modularity necessary
for general-purpose application [14]. Furthermore, although
some untethered systems can meet the pressure and frequency
requirements of many soft robots, they are typically limited to
use cases requiring lower ﬂow rates [19].
As such, there is currently no readily available untethered
hydraulic control system that meets the pressure, ﬂow rate, and
input requirements common to many soft robotic platforms.
2377-3766 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CHEN et al.: FLUIDIC CONTROL OF UNTETHERED UNDERW A TER SOFT ROBOTS 467
Fig. 1. General-use hydraulic control system for untethered operation of
underwater soft robots. (a) Key components for ﬂuidic actuation. A power source
provides electrical power (red line) to a ﬂuidic source, microcontroller, and
sensors. The microcontroller sends data (green line) as control signals to the
ﬂuidic source (pump). The microcontroller may also receive data (green lines)
from the sensor readings from the (1) the ﬂuidic source (e.g. pressure or ﬂow
sensors), (2) the soft actuator (e.g. using bend sensors), or both for closed-loop
control. Finally, the ﬂuidic source pressurizes soft actuators with ﬂuid (blue line).
(b) The control system uses a direct pump drive design to generate a wide range of
pressures and ﬂow rates suitable for soft robot control underwater. (c) The system
contains all necessary components to support a broad range of underwater soft
robots, including the following capabilities: untethered operation, water resistant
up to 1 m, and wireless communication to receive commands (d).
This notable lack of general-purpose tools prompts researchers
to repeatedly invest substantial time and effort in designing
and fabricating custom-made control systems tailored to their
speciﬁc requirements, diverting resources away from their pri-
mary research objectives. Prior efforts in developing open-
source, general-purpose pneumatic control systems and making
them publicly available [20], [21] have signiﬁcantly increased
the speed and accessibility of research efforts in soft robotics
that require the use of pneumatic actuation [22]. However, no
equivalent tools yet exist for hydraulically actuated soft robotic
systems.
In this work, we address this knowledge gap with an approach
to controlling underwater soft robots that can be achieved with
a compact and general-use hydraulic control system (Fig. 1(b)).
The system includes three independently controlled pumps
housed within a sealed enclosure, along with onboard sensors
for ﬂow monitoring. It is designed to deliver a range of pressures
and ﬂow rates sufﬁcient for common soft robot applications
(Fig. 2). The system enables simultaneous control of multiple
actuators and is intended to be adaptable to a variety of soft
robotic platforms.
Our primary contributions in this work include (i) an approach
to the design and fabrication of an open-source, general-purpose
hydraulic control system with speciﬁcations suitable for a broad
Fig. 2. Pressure and ﬂow requirements of underwater soft robots. Underwater
soft robots can be organized into three main categories: robots primarily focused
on swimming (pink, [11]*, [23], [24]), walking (blue, [13], [15]), or gripping
(green, [25], [26]). Pressure and ﬂow requirements of a single actuator in
previous underwater soft robots are estimated based on reported values. Outlined
triangles represent performance ranges of general-use control systems (systems
described in previous work are colored in yellow [14], and blue [19], while our
proposed system is colored in red). *Note: the ﬂow rate and pressure for [11]
were derived using [27], [28].
TABLE I
CONTROL SYSTEM SPECIFICA TIONS
range of soft robots, (ii) experimental characterization of our
hydraulic control system in isolation and when driving a repre-
sentative soft actuator underwater, (iii) non-invasive closed-loop
control of dispensed ﬂuid volumes and ﬂow rates, and (iv) a
demonstration of the general-use hydraulic control system to
actuate an underwater soft robot.
II. D
ESIGN OF A GENERAL-PURPOSE HYDRAULIC CONTROL
SYSTEM FOR SOFT ROBOTS
To develop a general-purpose hydraulic control system for
untethered operation of underwater soft robots, we aimed to
satisfy the performance requirements posed by existing systems.
To this end, we conducted a review of existing underwater soft
robots reported in the literature to identify a set of necessary
requirements for our general-use hydraulic control system. In
this section, we discuss those requirements along with the design
and fabrication of the system developed to satisfy them, and
we provide a concise summary of the resulting control system
speciﬁcations (Table I).
A. General System Requirements
Hydraulic control systems for soft actuators rely on several
core components to enable effective ﬂuidic actuation (Fig.1(a)).
Together, these components support the generation, regulation,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
468 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
and monitoring of pressurized ﬂuid necessary for controlled
actuation.
To inform the design of our hydraulic control system, we
surveyed existing underwater soft robots to identify common
performance requirements for a single actuator, speciﬁcally
pressure and ﬂow rate. We focused on systems that directly re-
ported these metrics or provided sufﬁcient data to estimate them
(e.g., actuation frequency and ﬂuid displacement to estimate
ﬂow rates). From this survey, we identiﬁed a maximum pressure
requirement of 345 kPa and a peak ﬂow rate of 1.6 L/min
per actuator (Fig. 2). These ﬁndings served as practical design
targets for the development of broadly applicable hydraulic
control systems.
B. Pump Selection and Evaluation
Guided by the general system requirements, we evaluated sev-
eral pump types used in ﬂuidic control for soft robots, including
micro gear pumps, piston pumps, diaphragm pumps, centrifugal
pumps, and peristaltic pumps [29].
To support independent control of multiple actuators while
minimizing mechanical complexity, we adopted a direct pump
drive (DPD) design [13], [14]. This design eliminated the need
for complex valving by assigning a dedicated and reversible
pump to each ﬂuidic channel, enabling precise control of pres-
sures and ﬂows in that channel. This DPD design reduced hard-
ware complexity while improving responsiveness and scalability
for multi-actuator systems.
Informed by the DPD approach and system requirements,
we assessed pump types based on reversibility, size, pressure
and ﬂow rate capabilities, and submersibility. Among these,
micro gear pumps emerged as the most suitable option, offering
a compact form factor, bidirectional ﬂow, and the ability to
generate pressures suitable for typical soft robotic actuation
while maintaining moderate ﬂow rates [27]. In considering
both performance characteristics and accessibility of available
options for gear pumps, we selected commercially available gear
pumps (speciﬁcally, MGD1000F-PK-V , TCS), which are fully
submersible, reversible, and meet the critical pressure and ﬂow
speciﬁcations deﬁned in our system requirements (Fig. 2). The
pumps deliver peak pressures of up to 0.9 MPa
1 and ﬂow rates
of up to 1.2 L/min.
C. Control System Electronics and Hardware
To control our system, we developed a custom control board
integrating all necessary electronic components for pump con-
trol, power management, and sensing. The board included a cus-
tom printed circuit board (PCB), a microcontroller (Nano Esp32,
Arduino), a battery (3S Lipo 11.1 V 120 C 1500mAh, Ovonic),
a sensorless electronic speed controller (ESC) (Bidirectional
40 A Brushless ESC 2-6 s UBEC 3 A 5 V , Readytosky), and
an RPM sensor (#HW A86060041, Hobbywing). The selected
pumps were driven by brushless DC motors, which required
sensorless ESCs for operation. Our custom PCB featured a
1The reported pressure is based on the pump manufacturer’s datasheet and
was not experimentally veriﬁed in this study.
ﬁne-adjust step-up voltage regulator (#2890, Polou), capable of
regulating the output voltage between 4.5 V and 20 V , enabling
ampliﬁcation or reduction of the battery voltage supplied to the
pumps. It also housed the microcontroller, which facilitated data
processing and control signal generation for the ESCs that drove
the motors in the pumps. Two onboard LED indicators signaled
the board’s operational status: one for the output voltage and
another for the 5 V supply to the Arduino.
In addition to enabling pump control, the board also incor-
porated sensing capabilities to support closed-loop operation
of the pumps. We integrated RPM sensors to monitor motor
speed, providing real-time feedback for each pump. This sensing
approach enabled estimation of the ﬂow rate without introducing
additional impedance to the ﬂuidic channels, as would have been
the case with in-line ﬂow sensors.
To achieve independent control of multiple ﬂuidic channels,
our control system used three pumps, each controlled by an
individual ESC and monitored with a dedicated RPM sensor.
This conﬁguration enabled the control system to drive up to three
independently controlled ﬂuidic channels, allowing actuation of
multiple components in a given soft robotic system.
D. Custom Enclosure Design and Manufacturing
We designed and manufactured a custom enclosure for our
electronics. Although various commercial enclosures are avail-
able, they imposed limitations on size and required careful mod-
iﬁcation to appropriately house all of the necessary components
while remaining waterproof. Therefore, we designed a cus-
tom, 3D-printed enclosure to minimize size, accommodate all
necessary control system components, and support modularity,
allowing the system to expand its number of independent control
inputs in increments of three through the integration of additional
modules. We designed the enclosure to be compatible with most
consumer 3D printers and to require minimal post-processing.
Our design focused on creating a waterproof enclosure with
the capacity for modularity. We designed the enclosure to with-
stand submersion up to 1 m for 30 min (as required by the
X7 water International Protection standard), while allowing
the enclosure to be connected to additional modules. To ad-
dress potential failure points including the case material, the
gasket, and the electronic connection points, we implemented
targeted waterprooﬁng solutions. We 3D printed the case us-
ing polylactic acid (PLA) and internally coated it with a thin
layer of epoxy (#50240, J-B Weld), which provided a more
uniform seal than an external coating of rubberized sealant
spray, especially given the enclosure’s complex geometry. For a
watertight yet accessible seal, we used a nitrile butadiene rubber
(NBR) X-ring gasket (#90025K616, McMaster-Carr, Fig. 1(c)).
Alternative options such as NBR O-rings, ethylene propylene
diene monomer (EPDM) O-rings, and Viton X-rings also proved
effective, but were signiﬁcantly more expensive or required more
careful installation to prevent leaks. For an effective face seal,
we targeted a compression ratio of 25-30% [30], ultimately
achieving a 28% compression ratio maintained through latches
along the enclosure edges and fasteners at the corners. We used
potted cable penetrators (#BR-100991, Blue Robotics) to enable
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CHEN et al.: FLUIDIC CONTROL OF UNTETHERED UNDERW A TER SOFT ROBOTS 469
external pump operation while keeping internal electronics dry
(Fig. 1(c)). The enclosure featured a rectangular form factor
to facilitate connection with additional modules, allowing for
potential scalability.
Internally, the enclosure included a single 3D-printed mount-
ing plate that secured all electronic components in place
(Fig. 1(c)). This removable plate simpliﬁed system maintenance
by allowing quick access for microcontroller reprogramming
and battery replacement.
III. C HARACTERIZA TION OFPUMP AND ACTUA TOR
PERFORMANCE USING RPM SENSOR DATA
A. Robot Platform and Actuator Selection
To evaluate our hydraulic control system, we selected a pre-
viously developed soft quadruped robot with four 3D-printed
soft legs, each comprised of three bellows actuators connected
in parallel [31]. Each bellows actuator required an independent
ﬂuidic input to enable controlled circular motion [32], which
must be coordinated across the four legs to drive the robot
forward (see [31] for detailed force and bending characterization
of the actuator). Our control system provided three independent
inputs, making it suited for operating one actuator and scaling up
to all four actuators in coordinated gait control. We selected this
platform to demonstrate our hydraulic control system’s capacity
for multi-actuator coordination and to conduct single-actuator
characterization experiments, evaluating control accuracy under
various conditions. Through our analyses, we assessed both the
untethered performance of the control system and its effective-
ness in driving soft actuators within a robot.
B. Pump and RPM Sensor Characterization for Non-Intrusive
Flow Estimation
We characterized the selected pumps using an in-line ﬂow
sensor and an RPM sensor. The ﬂow sensor provided accu-
rate readings when unloaded, but its low resolution limited
effectiveness under load. Higher-resolution alternatives were
cost-prohibitive and still required being placed in-line with each
ﬂuid channel, adding impedance and signiﬁcantly increasing the
footprint of the system. To address these limitations, we selected
a compact, cost-effective RPM sensor to estimate the pump’s
rotational velocity during operation.
This RPM sensor offered several advantages. Unlike a ﬂow
sensor, which must be placed in-line with the pump output and
can introduce additional impedance to the channel, the RPM
sensor monitors back-EMF voltages generated by the pump as it
spins and has a much smaller (often negligible) impact compared
to adding ﬂuidic sensors. Additionally, the RPM sensor can
be housed inside the enclosure without extra cable penetrators,
simplifying system integration.
By using these sensors with a gear pump, we aimed to enable
the estimation of the ﬂuidic volume displacement through each
channel. In the absence of direct deformation sensors in a soft
robot, the estimates produced by our sensing scheme can be
coupled with quasistatic models of the soft robot’s deformation
to enable closed-loop control. However, it is worth noting that the
Fig. 3. Flow rate characterization and estimation using an RPM sensor.
(a) We connected the pump,P, to an RPM sensor,S, and a 2-way valve,V.( a )T o
verify that the RPM sensor could be used to estimate ﬂow rates, we connected
the pump, P, to the inlet of a 2-way valve,V, with one outlet connected through a
ﬂow sensor, FS, to ambient water, and the other outlet directly to ambient water.
We used the former outlet to characterize the steady-state ﬂow of the pump as a
function of PWM duty cycle (dotted line) and the latter outlet to characterize the
steady-state rotational speed of the gear pump’s motor as a function of PWM
duty cycle (solid line). (b) We found that a linear ﬁt could closely model the
correspondence between ﬂow rates and RPM sensor readings.
RPM sensors are susceptible to electrical noise, and integrating
sensor readings to estimate volume displacements can produce
estimates that are prone to drift in the absence of any other
sensors in a given robot.
Despite their limitations, we found that the RPM sensors
effectively estimated ﬂow rates due to the direct relationship
between RPM and ﬂow rate. Since gear pumps are positive
displacement pumps, they displace a ﬁxed volume of ﬂuid per
rotation, making ﬂow rate nominally proportional to RPM [27],
[29]. To validate this, we conducted an experiment by connecting
a ﬂow sensor to the pump to measure ﬂow rates generated when
the pump was driven at a range of duty cycles. We then removed
the ﬂow sensor and recorded the motor’s settling RPM at the
same voltages, eliminating the additional load introduced by the
in-line ﬂow sensor (Fig. 3(a)). Both the settling RPM and ﬂow
rate measurements remained consistent under controlled condi-
tions. Finally, plotting ﬂow rate against settling RPM conﬁrmed
an approximately linear relationship, demonstrating that RPM
sensing could serve as a reliable proxy for direct ﬂow rate sensing
when direct measurement was impractical (Fig. 3(b)).
C. Actuator Bending Response Using RPM Sensor Data
Building on the relationship between the measured pump
RPM and ﬂow rate, we characterized the actuator’s bending
response by establishing a relationship between the RPM sensor
readings and the actuator’s maximum bending angle across
various voltages. Speciﬁcally, we used a single actuator from the
quadruped robot introduced earlier. When the pump is unloaded,
RPM and ﬂow rate exhibit a linear relationship. By integrating
RPM over time, we obtained the total number of revolutions,
which corresponded to the estimated ﬂuid displacement. Since
each revolution contributes incrementally to ﬂuid displacement,
and ﬂuid displacement drives actuator bending, we expected a
direct relationship between total revolutions and bending angle.
To validate this, we conducted an experiment to measure
the actuator’s maximum bending angle at different voltages
using a one-second input while simultaneously recording RPM
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
470 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 4. Bending angle estimation using an RPM sensor. (a) We recorded the
maximum bending angle of a bellows actuator after a one-second input across
a range of input duty cycles from the microcontroller. To measure the bending
angle, θ, of the actuator, we deﬁned a reference axis between the base and tip
in the unactuated state. We then deﬁned a straight line between the base and
tip in the actuator’s actuated state, and computed the angle between these two
lines. (b) We then characterized the recorded bending angle of the actuator as a
function of the total revolutions of the pump in the testing period and found that
a linear ﬁt accurately modeled the bending deformation of the leg.
sensor data. We tracked the maximum bending angle for each
voltage using an open-source visual tracking tool (Tracker,[33])
(Fig. 4(a)). As the actuator deformed, the pump experienced
increased loading due to internal ﬂuid resistance and material
stretching. This loading likely caused the actual ﬂow to decrease
relative to the commanded input, especially at higher voltages.
Nevertheless, because the RPM sensor directly measured the
pump’s rotational speed, it provided an accurate estimate of net
ﬂuid displacement, even under these non-ideal conditions. We
observed a maximum bending angle of∼60
◦, which corresponds
to an expected output force of∼1.5 N as per the characterizations
conducted in [31]. Additionally, when we plotted the integral
of the measured RPM (total revolutions) against the maximum
bending angle, the result was a linear relationship, conﬁrming
that RPM-based sensing can estimate actuator deformation de-
spite the presence of back pressure (Fig. 4(b)).
IV . C
ONTROL SYSTEM DESIGN AND EVA L U AT I O N
A. Signal Filtering
With a method for approximating ﬂow rate, ﬂuid displace-
ment, and the actuator’s bending response based on RPM sensor
readings, we used the RPM sensor as a non-intrusive proxy for
ﬂow sensing to implement a closed-loop feedback system. To re-
duce high-frequency noise and improve the output’s stability, we
applied a ﬁrst-order Inﬁnite Impulse Response (IIR) ﬁlter [34]
to the RPM sensor readings:
y
f [n]= α·y[n]+( 1 −α)·yf [n−1], (1)
where yf [n] is the ﬁltered signal at time n, y[n] is the output
signal at time n, and αis the smoothing factor 0 <α< 1.
B. Closed-Loop Control Implementation
The ﬁltered RPM data was then used in a closed-loop feedback
system (Fig. 5), which combined a proportional feedback control
term with a feedforward control term:
u(t)= Kp ·e(t)+ r(t), (2)
Fig. 5. Closed-loop control architecture for a single pump.
Fig. 6. Tracking performance of the pump’s output response under no-load
and loaded conditions. We recorded the rotational speed of the pump over time
for frequencies 0.25–4 Hz given a sinusoidal reference input with amplitude
of 7.5× 10
3 rpm. We produced the reference signal by converting the pump’s
input signal to a nominal RPM based off of prior characterization. Under no load
(A-B), the pump was free-ﬂowing into a water reservoir. (A) Reference RPM
trajectories (black) and output trajectories of pump under open-loop (blue) and
closed-loop (green) control are shown for 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1 Hz reference
trajectories and RMSE tracking errors (B) demonstrate asymptotic behavior for
reference trajectories from 0.25 Hz to 4 Hz. Under load (C)–(D), the pump was
connected to an actuator as we recorded the same data as with the no load case.
where u(t) is the control input, Kp is the gain factor, e(t) is
the error, and r(t) is the reference signal. The error is deﬁned
as e(t)= r(t)−y(t), where y(t) is the output signal. This
combined approach minimized RPM errors and improved the
system’s responsiveness to changes in the commanded input,
ensuring improved performance across varying frequencies.
C. Closed-Loop Performance Under No-Load Conditions
To assess the performance of the closed-loop controller under
no-load conditions, where the pump was free-ﬂowing, we com-
pared its ability to track the reference signal with an open-loop
system across a range of frequencies (Fig. 6(a)). At 0.25 Hz,
both control systems tracked the reference fairly closely with
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CHEN et al.: FLUIDIC CONTROL OF UNTETHERED UNDERW A TER SOFT ROBOTS 471
very minor deviations. However, as the frequency increased,
the root-mean-square tracking error (RMSE) of the open-loop
controller began to plateau at 0.75 Hz, unable to switch the
pump’s direction quickly enough. In contrast, the closed-loop
system maintained a lower overall tracking error up to operating
frequencies of 3.5 Hz, better adhering to the sinusoidal shape of
the reference signal (Fig.6(b)). Overall, these results highlighted
the closed-loop control system’s effectiveness, particularly at
lower frequencies, where it outperformed the open-loop system
in tracking and responsiveness.
V. I
NTEGRA TIONWITH THE SOFT QUADRUPED ROBOT
Following the evaluation of closed-loop performance under
no-load conditions, we assessed the system’s behavior under
the loading of soft actuators, with closed-loop control applied
at the pump level. First, we evaluated the performance of the
closed-loop controller with a single actuator from our previously
reported soft quadruped robot [31]. Then, we assessed our
hydraulic control system’s performance when fully integrated
with the quadruped robot.
A. Closed-Loop Performance Under Loading of Single Soft
Actuator
1) RPM Signal Tracking Analysis: To assess the closed-loop
feedback system’s performance under loaded conditions, we
designed an experiment where one pump was connected to
a single actuator. We applied a sinusoidal reference input to
the control system with an amplitude of 7.5× 10
3 rpm across
frequencies ranging from 0.25 Hz to 4 Hz. During each trial,
we recorded both the reference signal and RPM sensor data for
comparison.
With the data collected from these experiments, we evaluated
the closed-loop system’s performance under load by comparing
its ability to track the reference signal with that of the open-loop
system (Fig. 6(C)). As observed in the no-load condition, both
control systems followed the reference closely at 0.25 Hz,
with only minor deviations. As input frequency increased, a
similar trend to the no-load conditions was observed, where
the open-loop system began to plateau ﬁrst. However, under
load, the closed-loop system also struggled to maintain the
reference signal’s shape and the RMSE eventually plateaued
at higher frequencies. We found that at frequencies lower than
2 Hz the closed-loop controller consistently outperformed the
open-loop controller. At 2 Hz and above, both systems have
nearly identical error values (Fig. 6(D)). Overall, these results
highlighted the closed-loop control system’s effectiveness under
load, particularly at lower frequencies, where it outperformed
the open-loop system in tracking and responsiveness.
2) Signal Tracking and Physical Actuator Behavior: Having
established the closed-loop system’s ability to track a given
reference signal, we next examined how our controller’s perfor-
mance translated to the actuator’s physical behavior, speciﬁcally
its motion along a desired circular trajectory. To assess this,
we connected each of the three bellows actuators compris-
ing a single soft leg to independent pumps, resulting in three
pumps collectively driving a single actuator. We then used our
open-loop and closed-loop control strategies to track sinusoidal
reference signals on each pump with an amplitude of 2.7× 10
3
rpm, a frequency of 0.25 Hz, and with relative phases of 120
degrees.
To compare the actuator’s behavior under each control
scheme, we positioned it upright in a water tank and used a
top-down camera to capture its movement along with RPM
sensor data over time. We used the Tracker software to track
the position of the actuator’s endpoint over time.
Under open-loop control, discrepancies between the reference
signal and the pump outputs led to highly distorted tracking of
the desired circular trajectory. We found that after switching
directions from negative to positive ﬂow, the pumps would not
generate the required positive ﬂow quickly enough, limiting
their ability to sufﬁciently push ﬂuid in the forward direction.
Additionally, for pump 3, the signal also failed to reach the
desired negative amplitude of the reference signal, preventing
the pump from adequately pushing ﬂuid in the reverse direction
(Fig. 7(a)). Consequently, the actuator relied on the reverse ﬂuid
ﬂow, which limited its bending capacity and led to a smaller
radius circle when tracking the actuator’s endpoint trajectory.
Furthermore, the insufﬁcient reverse ﬂuid ﬂow from pump 3
prevented its respective actuator from bending signiﬁcantly,
causing the actuator’s endpoint to follow a diagonal path rather
than completing a full circular motion (Fig. 7(b)). Overall, these
issues in the open-loop control resulted in a distorted trajectory,
with the actuator’s endpoint tracing an imperfect circle about a
center that did not align with the central axis of the leg.
In contrast to the open-loop system, the closed-loop control
signiﬁcantly improved the actuator’s tracking performance, ad-
dressing the discrepancies observed in the open-loop control and
enhancing both signal tracking (Fig. 7(c)) and the generation of
circular trajectories by the actuator (Fig. 7(d)). The closed-loop
system tracked the reference signal signiﬁcantly better than the
open-loop control system, with an average RMSE of0.59× 10
3
rpm compared to 1.3× 103 rpm for the open-loop system,
representing a 54.62% reduction in error. This improved tracking
is also visible in the physical system, where the trajectory of the
actuator’s endpoint followed a more circular path (Fig.7(e))w i t h
a center that was closely aligned with the central axis of the leg.
Overall, we found that the closed-loop control system overcame
the discrepancies observed in the performance of the open-loop
controller, leading to more accurate tracking of the reference
signal and a trajectory that resulted in reduced distortion and a
more consistent radius.
VI. C
ONTROL SYSTEM PERFORMANCE ON QUADRUPED
SOFT ROBOT
After experimentally characterizing the performance of our
hydraulic control system with a single soft leg, we integrated
our control system into a quadruped robot to evaluate its per-
formance in multi-actuator control (Fig. 1(d)), with closed-loop
feedback applied at the pump level and no feedback from actu-
ator or robot positions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
472 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 7. Tracking performance of the pump’s output response and tip trajectory
of the actuator. We recorded the rotational speed of three pumps over time given
a sinusoidal reference input with amplitude of 2.7× 103 rpm, a frequency
of 0.25 Hz, and relative phases of 120°. Reference RPM trajectories (black)
and output trajectories of pump under open-loop (blue) are shown for all
three pumps (a), and the corresponding tip trajectory of the actuator with the
transient response (TR) in light blue and the steady-state response (SS) in blue
(b). Similarly, the reference RPM trajectories and output trajectories of pump
under closed-loop (green) are shown for all three pumps (c) along with the
corresponding tip trajectory of the actuator with the transient response (TR) in
light green and the steady-state response (SS) in green (d). (e) Frames of the
actuator with the tip trajectory of the actuator under closed-loop overlaid.
A. System Integration and Experimental Setup
A schematic of the tubing layout from pumps to actuator
bellows illustrates how pressurized ﬂuid was distributed to each
leg (Fig. 8(a)), enabling coordinated actuation. The full experi-
mental setup consisted of the robot, control computer, ﬂuid tank,
and overhead camera (Fig.8(b)). This setup allowed for accurate
tracking of the robot’s motion during trials.
To facilitate real-time command transmission, we operated
the robot via a custom web interface, with a microcontroller that
has built-in Wi-Fi connectivity (Arduino Nano ESP32) acting as
a server. The server hosted a web-based control panel accessible
from any device, enabling wireless operation. Communication
remained reliable when the robot was in shallow water or fully
out of the water, though signal attenuation increased with depth.
The code for the server implementation and web interface,
Fig. 8. Untethered operation of quadruped robot using our hydraulic control
system. (a) Schematic of tubing connections linking the control system to the
robot’s four legs, where solid circles of a given color indicates connection to the
same outlet of pumps P1, P2, and P3, and a crossed circle indicates connection
to the other outlet of the same pump. (b) Experimental setup illustrating (1)
wireless command transmission from the control device to the robot and (2)
robot positioned in the tank during operation. (b) Key phases of the gait cycle as
the robot walks forward under our closed-loop control scheme. (d) Trajectory of
the robot walking across the tank recorded from a top-down view of the robot.
along with usage details, is available in the project’s GitHub
repository.2
B. Gait Execution and Visualization
To demonstrate the robot’s locomotion, we adapted a gait
sequence from our prior soft quadruped robot study[31]. A side-
view sequence of the robot walking through the tank (Fig. 8(c))
highlighted key phases of the gait cycle and showed that the
closed-loop system enabled sustained cyclic actuation sufﬁcient
to produce forward motion. For this study, a single gait sequence
was used to allow a controlled comparison between open-loop
and closed-loop performance. Future work could explore alter-
native gait sequences to further improve locomotion efﬁciency,
trajectory repeatability, and overall walking performance.
C. Performance Comparison
To assess the effectiveness of the control system, we com-
pared robot trajectories under open-loop and closed-loop control
using position data from recorded trials (Fig. 8(d)). The robot
2https://github.com/aechen/HydraulicControlSystem
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CHEN et al.: FLUIDIC CONTROL OF UNTETHERED UNDERW A TER SOFT ROBOTS 473
exhibited negligible forward motion under open-loop control,
indicating insufﬁcient coordination of actuator inputs for walk-
ing. In contrast, closed-loop control enabled the robot to traverse
the full tank length, achieving a walking speed of 5.69 body
lengths per minute (0.094 BL/s).
VII. C
ONCLUSION
In conclusion, we presented a compact, modular hydraulic
control system designed for untethered underwater soft robots.
By integrating three independently controlled pumps with on-
board RPM sensing and a DPD approach, the system delivered
more precise, simultaneous control of multiple actuators at
pressure and ﬂow rates suitable for a wide range of soft robotic
applications. Experimental validation on a quadruped soft robot
demonstrated the system’s capability to enable untethered oper-
ation, offering a platform to accelerate the development of future
underwater soft robots.
Future work could investigate improving the control system
and overall robot performance, focusing on higher-performance
pumps, improved sensing, and enhanced trajectory tracking.
Potential hardware improvements include selecting new pumps
with increased maximum pressure, ﬂow rate, and faster switch-
ing speeds to meet future applications with requirements beyond
those of current underwater soft robots. Additional or alternative
sensors (e.g., bend, pressure, and ﬂow sensors) could be added
to reduce output bias and enable closed-loop regulation at the
actuator or robot level. Integrating these sensors would allow for
more precise trajectory tracking and improved motion reliability,
despite the added integration complexity and system footprint.
Finally, leveraging the system’s modular design for scalable,
distributed actuation could support larger or more complex soft
robotic platforms.
R
EFERENCES
[1] P . A. der Maur et al., “ROBOA: Construction and evaluation of a steerable
vine robot for search and rescue applications,” inProc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf.
Soft Robot., 2021, pp. 15–20.
[2] E. T. Gulnergiz, S. Dilibal, B. Gormus, J. O. Danquah, and O. F. Emon,
“Additively manufactured soft pneumatic gripper integrated remotely op-
erated underwater vehicle (ROV) for grasping archeological remains,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Congr . Hum.- Comput. Interaction, Optim. Robot. Appl. ,
2023, pp. 01–05.
[3] G. Li et al., “Self-powered soft robot in the mariana trench,” Nature,
vol. 591, no. 7848, pp. 66–71, Mar. 2021.
[4] F. Hartmann, M. Baumgartner, and M. Kaltenbrunner, “Becoming sustain-
able, the new frontier in soft robotics,” Adv. Mater ., vol. 33, no. 19, 2021,
Art. no. 2004413.
[5] D. Trew Crist, J. Ausubel, and P . E. Wagoner, First census of marine life
2010: Highlights of a decade of discovery . Washington, D.C, USA: A
publication of the Census of Marine Life, 2010.
[6] J. Zhang et al., “Robotic artiﬁcial muscles: Current progress and future
perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 761–781, Jun. 2019.
[7] N. El-Atab et al., “Soft actuators for soft robotic applications: A review,”
Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 2, no. 10, 2020, Art. no. 2000128.
[8] R. K. Katzschmann, A. D. Marchese, and D. Rus, “Hydraulic autonomous
soft robotic ﬁsh for 3D swimming,” in Proc. Exp. Robot., 14th Int. Symp.
Exp. Robot., 2015, pp. 405–420.
[9] M. Ishida, D. Drotman, B. Shih, M. Hermes, M. Luhar, and M. T. Tolley,
“Morphing structure for changing hydrodynamic characteristics of a soft
underwater walking robot,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett. , vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 4163–4169, Oct. 2019.
[10] G. Chen, X. Y ang, X. Zhang, and H. Hu, “Water hydraulic soft actuators
for underwater autonomous robotic systems,” Appl. Ocean Res., vol. 109,
2021, Art. no. 102551.
[11] R. K. Katzschmann, J. DelPreto, R. MacCurdy, and D. Rus, “Exploration
of underwater life with an acoustically controlled soft robotic ﬁsh,” Sci.
Robot., vol. 3, no. 16, 2018, Art. no. eaar3449.
[12] J. Frame, N. Lopez, O. Curet, and E. D. Engeberg, “Thrust force character-
ization of free-swimming soft robotic jellyﬁsh,” Bioinspiration Biomimet-
ics, vol. 13, no. 6, Sep. 2018, Art. no. 064001.
[13] Q. Tan et al., “Underwater crawling robot with hydraulic soft actuators,”
Front. Robot. AI, vol. 8, 2021, Art. no. 688697.
[14] M. A. Bell, B. Gorissen, K. Bertoldi, J. C. Weaver, and R. J. Wood, “A
modular and self-contained ﬂuidic engine for soft actuators,” Adv. Intell.
Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 2100094.
[15] T. Paschal, M. A. Bell, J. Sperry, S. Sieniewicz, R. J. Wood, and J.
C. Weaver, “Design, fabrication, and characterization of an untethered
amphibious sea urchin-inspired robot,”IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,v o l .4 ,
no. 4, pp. 3348–3354, Oct. 2019.
[16] G. Chen, X. Y ang, Y . Xu, Y . Lu, and H. Hu, “Neural network-based motion
modeling and control of water-actuated soft robotic ﬁsh,” Smart Mater .
Struct., vol. 32, no. 1, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 015004.
[17] S. Liu, C. Liu, Y . Liang, L. Ren, and L. Ren, “Design and control of an
untethered robotic tuna based on a hydraulic soft actuator,” IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatron., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 623–633, Feb. 2025.
[18] N. S. Usevitch, Z. M. Hammond, M. Schwager, A. M. Okamura, E. W.
Hawkes, and S. Follmer, “An untethered isoperimetric soft robot,” Sci.
Robot., vol. 5, no. 40, 2020, Art. no. eaaz0492.
[19] D. Padovani and E. J. Barth, “Design and characterization of a miniature
hydraulic power supply for high-bandwidth control of soft robotics,” in
Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf. Soft Robot. , 2020, pp. 345–350.
[20] A. Shtarbanov, “Flowio development platform–the pneumatic ‘raspberry
pi’ for soft robotics,” in Proc. Extended Abstr . CHI Conf. Hum. Factors
Comput. Syst., 2021,pp. 1–6.
[21] D. P . Holland, E. J. Park, P . Polygerinos, G. J. Bennett, and C. J. Walsh,
“The soft robotics toolkit: Shared resources research design,” Soft Robot.,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 224–230, 2014.
[22] O. Kilic Afsar et al., “Omniﬁber: Integrated ﬂuidic ﬁber actuators for
weaving movement based interactions into the ‘fabric of everyday life’,”
in
Proc. 34th Annu. ACM Symp. User Interface Softw. Technol. , 2021,
pp. 1010–1026.
[23] Q. Xia et al., “Research on ﬂexible collapsible ﬂuid-driven bionic robotic
ﬁsh,” Ocean Eng., vol. 276, 2023, Art. no. 114203.
[24] H. Feng, Y . Sun, P . A. Todd, and H. P . Lee, “Body wave generation for
anguilliform locomotion using a ﬁber-reinforced soft ﬂuidic elastomer
actuator array toward the development of the eel-inspired underwater soft
robot,” Soft Robot., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 233–250, 2020.
[25] K. C. Galloway et al., “Soft robotic grippers for biological sampling on
deep reefs,” Soft Robot., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 23–33, 2016.
[26] M. Wu et al., “Octopus-inspired underwater soft robotic gripper
with crawling and swimming capabilities,” Research, vol. 7, 2024,
Art. no. 0456.
[27] R. K. Katzschmann, A. d. Maille, D. L. Dorhout, and D. Rus, “Cyclic
hydraulic actuation for soft robotic devices,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., 2016, pp. 3048–3055.
[28] A. D. Marchese, C. D. Onal, and D. Rus, “Autonomous soft robotic
ﬁsh capable of escape maneuvers using ﬂuidic elastomer actuators,” Soft
Robot., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 75–87, 2014.
[29] I. J. Karassik et al., Pump Handbook. New Y ork, NY , USA: McGraw-Hill,
2008.
[30] Parker O-Ring Handbook. Orlando, FL, USA: Parker Seal Group, 1982.
[31] D. Drotman, S. Jadhav, M. Karimi, P . de Zonia, and M. T. Tolley, “3D
printed soft actuators for a legged robot capable of navigating unstructured
terrain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat. , 2017, pp. 5532–5538.
[32] T. Kalisky et al., “Differential pressure control of 3D printed soft ﬂu-
idic actuators,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2017,
pp. 6207–6213.
[33] D. Brown and A. J. Cox, “Innovative uses of video analysis,”Phys. Teacher,
vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 145–150, Mar. 2009.
[34] M. Bellanger and B. A. Engel, Digital Signal Processing: Theory and
Practice. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Genova. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 01:54:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 