HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic
Physical Interfaces
Takafumi Morita
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
morita@xlab.iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yu Kuwajima
Smart Materials lab., Shibaura
Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nb21105@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Ayato Minaminosono
Smart Materials lab., Shibaura
Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
nb20108@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Shingo Maeda
Smart Materials lab., Shibaura
Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
maeshin@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Yasuaki Kakehi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
kakehi@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Figure 1: HydroMod. (A) HydroMod supports three types of main modules and four types of additional parts, (B) Snapping
each module together by magnets, (C) Actuated seesaw, (D) Silent pin-based color display, (E) Wearable mobile fluid interface.
ABSTRACT
In recent years, actuators that handle fluids such as gases and liquids
have been attracting attention for their applications in soft robots
and shape-changing interfaces. In the field of HCI, there have been
various inflatable prototyping tools that utilize air control, however,
very few tools for liquid control have been developed. In this study,
we propose HydroMod, new constructive modules that can eas-
ily generate liquid flow and programmatically control liquid flow,
with the aim of lowering the barrier to entry for prototyping with
liquids. HydroMod consists of palm-sized small modules, which
can generate liquid flow with the electrohydrodynamics (EHD)
phenomenon by simply connecting the modules. Moreover, users
can configure and control the flow path by simply recombining
the modules. In this paper, we propose the design of the modules,
evaluate the performance of HydroMod as a fluid system, and also
show the possible application scenarios of fluid prototyping using
this system.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502096
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and tools.
KEYWORDS
Programmable Materials, Toolkit, Prototyping, Fluid Interface, Wear-
ables, Electrohydrodynamics
ACM Reference Format:
Takafumi Morita, Yu Kuwajima, Ayato Minaminosono, Shingo Maeda, and Ya-
suaki Kakehi. 2022. HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping
Hydraulic Physical Interfaces. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems (CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502096
1 INTRODUCTION
Groups of components are increasingly being modularized, pack-
aged, and kitted to enable prototyping in electronics and robotics
for those without engineering expertise [2, 28, 39, 52]. These pro-
totyping platforms have been enriched with features such as net-
work connectivity [27] and an environment that allows graphical
programming development without the need to write code [ 47].
Toolkits such as littleBits [5], which reduce the time required to
connect components and allow users to create electronic systems by
simply connecting modules, are also expected to have applications
in wearables [20] and soft materials [22].
In the field of HCI, there has been a significant amount of re-
search in recent years on programmable matter, where the material
itself has interactivity [9, 11, 16, 19, 24, 32–35, 55]. Fluid systems,
particularly in gases and liquids, are attracting attention for various
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
applications, such as sensing methods, actuation, and applications
in the field of soft robotics. However, compared with fields such as
electronics and robotics, the development of platforms for proto-
types in the field of programmable materials that deal with fluid
control is a developing area.
Prototyping with materials such as gases and liquids is a chal-
lenge because the system that drives the fluid must be built from
scratch and requires specialized knowledge. Several toolkits for
handling gases have been released in the recent years. Typical ex-
amples include The Soft Robotics Toolkit [18], Pneuduino [42] [36],
Programmable Air [1], and FlowIO [49]. However, there are still
very few toolkits for handling liquids, which are also a type of fluid.
The characteristics of using liquids include weight manipulation,
color expression, and heating/cooling control. There are three ma-
jor reasons why liquids are difficult to handle. First, many large
external devices are required for the handling of liquids. Further, rel-
atively large devices such as pumps, tanks, and valves are required
to generate a liquid flow. Second, it is difficult to reconfigure the
path design of a liquid flow. Once the liquid flow path is specified
and designed, it takes a considerable amount of time to reconfigure
it again using the same parts because the existing fluid system is
not designed to be frequently removed. Third, the fluid system
is vulnerable. If any part of the system is defective, the working
fluid will leak, and the system will not function properly, thereby
consuming the working fluid.
In this study, we propose HydroMod, novel constructive mod-
ules that can easily generate liquid a flow and programmatically
control a liquid flow, with the aim of lowering the barrier to entry
for prototyping through the use of liquids. We utilize electrohydro-
dynamic (EHD) pumps [7] [6], which use the EHD phenomenon
as a pump function to generate a liquid flow. The EHD phenom-
enon occurs when a high voltage is applied to a dielectric liquid.
Utilizing the EHD pump, no mechanical moving parts are required
because the flow is generated simply by placing an electrode in
the liquid and applying a voltage. Furthermore, we expect that the
small size and quietness of the EHD pump will address the problem
of using a large pump, which is the primary cause of the difficulty
when handling a fluid. Therefore, we adopted an EHD pump for
the pump function of HydroMod. The HydroMod is composed of
palm-sized compact modules: Pump modules that generate a liquid
flow, Actuate modules that apply a high voltage to drive the Pump
modules, and Wire modules that connect the modules. Each module
of the HydroMod is designed to be easily connected by magnets. A
fluid flow can be generated by simply connecting these modules,
and flow paths can be freely designed by simply reassembling the
modules, which eliminates the difficulty of reconfiguring the fluid
system, which is a challenge. Furthermore, because HydroMod is a
plug-and-play module, anyone can easily prototype fluid systems
without the need for specialized knowledge. In addition, because
the fluid system is built through the combination of modules, even
if a defect occurs somewhere, it can be fixed by simply changing
a part of the module without changing the entire system. Hence,
HydroMod is resistant to vulnerabilities in fluid systems.
In this paper, we propose a module design, evaluate the per-
formance of HydroMod as a fluid system in terms of the pressure
and flow rate, and show the possible application scenarios of fluid
prototyping using this system.
The primary contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) Proposal of modules that allow an easy and reconfigurable
prototyping of the fluid systems.
(2) By simply combining modules, a fluid flow can be easily gen-
erated, and the behavior of the fluid, such as the direction,
pressure, and flow rate, can be freely changed in a reconfig-
urable manner.
(3) By synchronizing multiple modules wirelessly, each fluid
source can be linked to group control.
(4) Small standalone driven modules, which do not require large
external devices such as pumps or tanks required for con-
ventional fluid systems, allow the fluid generation source to
be easily transported.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Tools for Lowering the Barrier to
Prototyping Systems
Toolkits have been developed to enable an easy electronic and
robotic prototyping. Their development and widespread use not
only allow beginners and hobbyists to handle equipment that was
previously unattainable without specialized knowledge but also
researchers and engineers to prototype more quickly.
Electronic development boards such as Arduino [2], Raspberry
Pi [39], and Mbed [ 26] are such tools that enable the affordable
prototyping of electronic systems. These electronic development
boards are equipped with microcontrollers and input/output ports,
and some even have a dedicated comprehensive development en-
vironment, making electronic construction accessible to anyone
new to the field. Prototyping tools for robot development include
kits such as Lego Mindstorms [28], MakeBlock [25], roBlocks [46],
and Toio [52]. These kits allow the user to transform the shape
of the object as desired using blocks and other materials, and the
behavior of the robot can be easily handled through visual pro-
gramming. One of the tools for the IoT (The Internet of Things) is
MESH [27], which consists of blocks with functions such as sensors
and switches that can be used for intuitive visual programming
to easily realize familiar IoT concepts. Scratch [ 47], which is an
educational programming language, allows beginners to systemati-
cally learn the processing flow and algorithms of programming by
combining parts called blocks instead of writing the code.
In addition, there are several STEAM education programs for
young children who have no knowledge of electronics or program-
ming that allow them to create electronic systems by simply con-
necting modules. LittleBits [ 5] is a magnetic electronics kit that
makes learning to use electronic circuits fun by connecting mag-
netic modules together and is used in a variety of educational
settings. MakerWare [20] allows the building of electronic systems
by combining modules on textiles and can even be used as a wear-
able device. SoftMod [22] is an electronics kit that allows users to
create freely shaped electronic systems by combining flexible soft
modules.
Prototyping tools in the field of programmable materials, by con-
trast, exist mainly in the form of toolkits for the handling of gases.
The Soft Robotics Toolkit Control Board [18] can be used to quickly
test the operation of pneumatic soft actuators. The board consists
HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
of a pump and solenoid valve that can operate and control soft ac-
tuators. Pneuduino [42] [36] and Programmable Air[1] are modular
hardware platforms for controlling the air flow and pressure and
can be programmed using the Arduino IDE. FlowIO [49] is a small
modular pneumatic development platform that includes hardware
functions and software functions that include control through a
GUI. In addition, MorphIO [33] is a combination of inflatable mod-
ules with built-in sensing functions of deformation, which can be
used to provide various movements to soft actuators by hand.
Thus, there are numerous toolkits that lower the barrier to entry
for prototyping; however, in the area of programmable materials,
they are limited to those dealing with gases, and there are few
toolkits for dealing with liquids.
2.2 Fluid-based Interactive Physical Interfaces
By using fluid flow to provide various functions to objects, research
on various fluid systems incorporating, among others, object defor-
mation, tactile sensation, heating/cooling control, and color change
has been actively conducted.
Many interfaces have been proposed for fluid systems that use
gases to deform objects and display tactile sensations by utilizing
the lightness of gases. Pouch Motor [ 34] [35] [32], a pneumatic
actuator that can deform objects into various shapes, has been
applied as an actuator in bio-robots. PneUI [55] is a soft composite
material that is pneumatically actuated and can change its shape
in various ways. The Force Jacket [ 9] has 26 airbags in a jacket
that provide rapid and complex tactile feedback to the entire upper
body. COLORISE [11] can deform and change the color of objects
by stretching an elastomeric membrane with air pressure.
There are many interfaces for fluid systems using liquids, mainly
for tactile sensation, heating/cooling control, and color control,
using the weight, thermal conductivity, and refractive index of
liquids. ThermoCaress [24], a haptic device that creates a stroking
sensation by applying force on the forearm and simultaneously
presenting heat feedback, realizing the phenomenon in which the
heat appears to be moving by shifting the position of the haptic
stimulus. HydroRing [16] provides tactile sensations of pressure,
vibration, and temperature to the fingertips using a liquid that
moves inside a thin, flexible latex tube attached to the fingertips.
TuVe [19] is a display that changes color by displaying a color
pattern by controlling the liquid in a tube.
Thus, fluid systems can provide a variety of functions but most
require large external devices to manipulate the fluid. In the case
of gases: air compressors, valves, vacuum pumps, etc. are required,
and in the case of liquids: tanks, valves, pumps, etc. are required,
each of which requires a large configuration. In addition, these
large external devices are noisy and therefore have a limited range
of applications. In addition, it takes a lot of time to reassemble a
system after it has been set up, owing to the complexity of the
system. It is especially difficult to reassemble a liquid system by
changing the flow path with the still liquid inside the system. For
gases, small prototyping tools such as FlowIO [49] are becoming
available, but for liquids, there are almost none because of the
challenges mentioned above.
2.3 Self-Actuated Hydraulic Interfaces without
Large External Devices
Fluid systems exist for liquids that do not require large external
devices, mainly in the field of microfluidics [54], which are widely
considered in material science, mechanical engineering, and ro-
botics. Venous Materials [30] [29], which are fluid sensors, display
color changes through the flow of colored liquid due to deforma-
tion caused by mechanical input from the user, such as pressure
or bending. Similarly, with deformation due to mechanical input
from the user, SkinFlow [50] is a new soft robot sensor that utilizes
liquid permeation, and Garrad et al. proposed the interaction [14]
of moving conductive liquids to create electrical connections. RElec-
trode [51], which requires small external devices, is a reconfigurable
electrode using microfluidic technology to sense capacitance, induc-
tance, resistance/pressure, temperature, pH, etc. Octobot [23] [53],
an octopus-shaped soft robot, is driven by a gas generated from
a chemical reaction inside its body. There are also small, precise
micropumps that can control small amounts of liquid in analytical
instruments, medicine, and biotechnology.
Although fluid systems exist for liquids that do not require large
external devices, their use is limited by the low controllability and
noise of the pumps. Furthermore, in the case of microfluidics, it is
not possible to reconfigure the system after the fluid system has
been specified and implemented.
2.4 EHD Pump
Electrohydrodynamics (EHD) is the flow phenomenon of a dielectric
liquid in a high electric field induced by an electrochemical reaction.
The mechanism of EHD is shown in Fig. 2, where the Coulomb
force acts on the ions X − generated by the charge injection near
the electrodes in the dielectric liquid, and the ions move along the
electric force lines from the cathode to the anode. In this process,
the ions X − collide repeatedly with the neutral species X in the
liquid, causing a net flow. This phenomenon has been studied both
theoretically and experimentally since the 1960s and has long been
discussed by Jones et al [ 40, 41, 44]. In previous studies, a pump
based on the EHD phenomenon has been proposed [3, 6, 8, 12, 13,
21, 37, 56]. The generated pressure P and flow rate Q in the steady
state are expressed by the following equations [6]:
P = kpϵE2 (1)
Q = kqϵE2D4 (2)
Where kp and kq are constants depending on the geometry of the
pump, ϵ is the relative permittivity of the solution, E is the electric
field, and D is the size of the channel.
The dielectric liquids and their operating conditions of the EHD
pump have been investigated [ 13]. NOVEC 7100 (3M) is widely
used as a dielectric liquid because of its stability. In addition, the
operating condition should be an electric field of less than10 MV/m
to prevent breakdown and generate a stable flow. In this study,
the electric field was set to be less than 10 MV/m as the driving
condition. Various shapes of electrodes such as needles, rings and
meshs have been used for EHD pumps in previous studies [3, 56].
We adopted the comb-shaped electrode proposed in Stretchable
pump [6, 7]. The EHD pump with comb-shaped electrodes has a
symmetrical structure and many pairs of electrodes, and therefore
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
easily controls the flow direction, pressure, and flow rate. Hence,
we can use it with high interactivity.
EHD pumps have been proposed mainly in the MEMS field,
such as a cooling system for semiconductor chips [8], a pump in
a microchannel [ 45] and a mixer for microfluidic channels [ 37].
In recent years, the EHD pump has been proposed as a driving
source for soft actuators [ 6, 21, 48]. LayerPump [12], created by
digital fabrication, has also been proposed as a method for designing
functional 3D objects. EHD pumps are gradually gaining attention
in the field of interaction.
The EHD pump generates flow by simply placing an electrode in
a dielectric liquid and applying a voltage. The EHD pump is simple,
compact, and lightweight. The EHD pump operates silently without
the use of mechanically moving parts such as links, shafts, and
gears. Therefore, we adopted an EHD pump as the pump module
of HydroMod. Furthermore, in this study, we have considered and
improved the drawbacks of the EHD pump, such as the danger of
high voltage and the enlargement of the external power supply.
Figure 2: Mechanism of EHD.
3 HYDROMOD
In this section, we describe a system overview of the HydroMod,
the design rule of an EHD pump used as the pump function, and the
reconfigurability of the fluid system prototyping using HydroMod.
Finally, we present a novel flow control method applied through
the combination of modules.
3.1 System Overview
HydroMod is a prototyping module that manipulates the appear-
ance and movement of objects through liquid control. It was created
using the design guidelines of easily configuring and prototyping
the flow path for the liquid and the electronic circuits to manip-
ulate its behavior. Our goal is to create a module that allows not
only researchers and engineers, but also beginners and hobbyists
to easily prototype hydraulic physical interfaces.
HydroMod was created based on the following requirements to
enable an easy liquid prototyping.
• By combining modules, it is possible to design a fluid system
that is easy to assemble and has a high reconfigurability.
Figure 3: HydroMod supports three types of main modules
and four types of additional parts: (a) Actuate module, (b)
Pump module, (c) Wire module, (d) Battery, (e) Connector,
(f) Small tank, (g) Tube including soft and hard types.
Figure 4: Five step process to operate the fluids with Hy-
droMod: (A) place the Pump module at arbitrary positions,
(B) connect the Actuate module to the Pump module with a
magnetic connector, (C) attach tubes or small tanks as the
flow path, (D) inject Novec 7100 as a liquid in the fluid sys-
tem, (E) control the created fluid system with simple GUI
software.
• It is an untethered module based on wireless communication,
which allows the synchronization of multiple pumps and a
distributed placement according to the shape of the target.
• The pump function can be miniaturized without the need
for large external devices, and fluid systems can be designed
including wearable and mobile applications.
As shown in Fig. 3, the current version of HydroMod supports
three types of main modules and four types of additional parts. The
main modules consist of (a) Actuate module that can control the
high voltage applied to drive the EHD pump of the Pump module,
(b) Pump module with an EHD pump that generates liquid flow as
a pump function, and (c) Wire module that acts as a conductor to
electrically connect the Pump module and Actuate module. Addi-
tional parts consist of (d) batteries that drive the Actuate module,
(e) connectors that connect the flow paths, (f) small tanks that store
the liquid, and (g) tubes, including soft and hard types, serving as
HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
the flow path. Batteries, connectors, and tubes are off-the-shelf com-
ponents, and small tanks are prepared by simply crafting acrylic
sheets according to the size required.
Each of the modules comprising HydroMod has a built-in magnet
as a connector. It is easy to create flow paths and electrical circuits by
simply connecting the modules together with the magnets. Because
the electrical connection between the modules is also maintained
by using the magnet connectors as part of the electrical circuit,
the flow path can be freely designed by reconfiguring the modules
to take into account the flow direction, pressure, and flow rate,
thus providing a high reconfigurability. In addition, each module
is small enough to fit in the palm of the hand and has a wireless
communication function, making it possible to create a compact
hydraulic system that can be carried around and used while moving
around, which has been difficult to achieve with existing hydraulic
systems.
HydroMod is simple and requires only five steps to operate the
fluid system, as shown in Fig. 4. First, the Pump Module, which
generates the fluid flow, is placed at an arbitrary position. Subse-
quently, the Actuate module is connected to the Pump module with
a magnetic connector. If the Pump module and Actuate module can-
not be connected next to each other owing to placement problems
during prototyping, the Wire module can be connected between
them to increase the flexibility of the module placement. Next, the
additional parts such as connectors, tanks or tubes are attached
to create a flow path as needed. The user then injects Novec 7100
as a liquid in the fluid system. Finally, a simple GUI software on a
smartphone is used to remotely control the created fluid system.
As the main feature of HydroMod, it allows the users to freely
design a fluid system through this simple operation. Furthermore,
because the Actuate module has a wireless communication function,
the liquid can be controlled wirelessly through user equipment
such as a computer or smartphone, and each Pump module can
be synchronized. Therefore, HydroMod has the potential to create
novel interactive expressions using liquids.
3.2 Principle of Pump Function Utilizing EHD
Pump with Comb-Shaped Electrodes
HydroMod utilizes an EHD pump, which is characterized by its
small size, light weight, and quietness. In particular, it uses an
EHD pump with a comb-shaped electrode that can ensure a stable
pressure and flow rate. In this section, we describe the operating
principle of the pump.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the operating mechanism of the comb elec-
trode used in the EHD pump. In the comb electrode, two electrodes,
one positive and one negative, are placed in the dielectric liquid so
that they face each other. This generates an electric field between
the electrodes when a high voltage is applied to them. Because the
magnitude of the electric field is proportional to the magnitude
of the applied voltage and inversely proportional to the distance
between the electrodes, it is necessary to reduce the distance be-
tween the electrodes to generate a liquid flow at the lowest possible
voltage. The generated electric field causes the dielectric liquid to
ionize and move to the electrode side of the opposite charge, result-
ing in the swimming phenomenon of the liquid. The more pairs of
electrodes that generate the electric field, the higher the pressure
in the flow. The Pump module utilizes an EHD pump as the pump
function. Therefore, the pump is sufficiently small to fit in the palm
of the hand.
Figure 5: Mechanism diagram of EHD Phenomenon at
Comb-Shaped Electrodes Layout.
Figure 6: Overall diagram of EHD Phenomenon at Comb-
Shaped Electrodes Layout.
3.3 Intuitive Liquid Function Design through
the Combination of HydroMod Modules
Fluid systems that handle liquids usually consist of pumps, tanks,
flow paths, and solenoid valves. These systems are usually complex
systems with a large amount of electrical and fluid wiring, and thus
it takes a lot of time and effort to reconfigure the system after it has
been built. The only current approach to prevent this is the design
of a fluid system by simulating the arrangement of pumps, tanks,
flow paths, and solenoid valves, as well as the pressure and flow
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
rate. This requires expertise and special equipment and is a barrier
to entry for prototyping with fluids.
The main features of the proposed HydroMod are the modularity
and reconfigurability of the fluid system. All devices that make up
the fluid system are substituted into small modules, which are
easy to handle, and once the modules are connected, they can be
easily reconnected. This makes it possible to design the flow path
intuitively through trial and error without detailed simulations.
Furthermore, HydroMod has a major feature that is not found in
existing fluid systems that handle liquids. In the past, the pressure
and flow rates in fluid systems were usually controlled by adjusting
the opening of the solenoid valves. However, with HydroMod, the
pressure and flow rate can be changed tangibly by reconfiguring the
Pump modules. Fig. 7 shows the changes in the fluid functions when
the Pump modules are combined in series and parallel. Connecting
the Pump modules in series increases the pressure of the fluid,
whereas connecting them in parallel increases the flow rate of the
fluid. Not only can HydroMod programmatically control the liquid
from a microcontroller, but it can also be used to design a fluid
system with a tangibly adjusted fluid output in hardware.
Figure 7: Designing liquid functions by combining pump
modules. (Top) If the Pump modules are connected in series,
the pressure increases, and (Bottom) if they are connected
in parallel, the flow rate increases.
3.4 Flow Control Method by Recombining
HydroMod
We show how to control the flow of a fluid system with a combi-
nation of HydroMod modules. The flow control in a fluid systems
often involves multiple pumps [11] [16] and mechanical valves for
switching the flow path [55] [9]. However, in conventional systems,
the number of required devices increases, making the system larger.
In addition, mechanical devices such as valves cause a significant
driving noise. Therefore, we show that the proposed HydoroMod
can be used to easily control the liquid flow by simply replacing
the module.
In Fig. 8, We indicate how easy it is to control the flow by simply
changing the modules using the fluid system. This HydroMod sys-
tem can dynamically control the flow direction by simply replacing
the Actuate module, without changing the entire system and with-
out introducing additional equipment. The four consecutive flow
controls in Fig.8 are taken as examples and are described in the fol-
lowing order. First, (A) if the two Actuate modules are placed in the
lower left, only the fan on the left turns counterclockwise. Subse-
quently, (B) if the two Actuate modules are placed in the upper left,
only the fan on the left turns clockwise. Next, (C) if the two Actuate
modules are placed in the upper left and two Actuate modules are
placed in the lower right, the fan on the left turns clockwise and
the fan on the right turns clockwise simultaneously. Finally, (D)
if the two Actuate modules are placed in the upper left and two
Actuate modules are placed in the upper right, the fan on the left
turns clockwise and the fan on the right turns counterclockwise
simultaneously. In this way, fluid systems using HydroMod can
dynamically and tangibly control the fluid flow in ways that are not
possible with conventional fluid systems. This control method does
not require reworking the fluid system to change the fluid flow,
but can be controlled simply by attaching the Actuate module, and
thus there is no need to introduce new equipment. In addition, the
pump module uses an EHD pump, which has the advantage of not
generating noise or driving any existing noise from the mechanical
parts.
Figure 8: Reconfigurable flow control by recombining Actu-
ate modules: (A) place the Actuate modules in the lower left,
only the fan on the left turns counterclockwise. (B) place
the Actuate modules in the upper left, only the fan on the
left turns clockwise. (C) place the Actuate modules in the up-
per left and lower right, the fan on the left turns clockwise
and the fan on the right turns clockwise simultaneously. (D)
place the Actuate modules in the upper left and upper right,
the fan on the left turns clockwise and the fan on the right
turns counterclockwise simultaneously.
4 FABRICATION / IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we summarize the fabrication method, implementa-
tion, and specific functions of the Pump module, Actuate module,
HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
and Wire module, which are the constituent modules of Hydro-
Mod. Subsequently, we describe the additional parts that are used
as needed when prototyping a flow system using HydroMod, and
discuss the software used for HydroMod.
4.1 Pump module
Fig. 9 shows a system diagram of the pump module. The pump
module is sufficiently small to fit in the palm of the hand ( 20 mm
× 70 mm × 10 mm ). The Pump module consists of five layers: a
kapton sheet, which is the base of the module; copper tape for
the comb-shaped electrodes, which causes the EHD phenomenon;
neodymium magnets, which are the connection of the module with
other modules; VHB, which is the flow channel for the liquid; an
acrylic plate, which protects the flow channel; and fittings for a
connection with the tube of the flow path.
The fabrication process is described as follows: First, copper tape
is applied to the kapton sheet. Then, using a cutting plotter (silhou-
ette CAMEO4), the copper tape is cut into a comb shape, and the
unwanted copper is removed with tweezers. Next, the neodymium
magnet, which is connected to other modules, is attached to the
copper tape on the four edges of the sheet through a reflow sol-
dering. Whereas the melting point of the cream solder used for a
reflow is approximately 180 ℃ , the neodymium magnet loses its
magnetism irreversibly at the Curie point of 310 ℃ . Therefore, the
temperature of the hot plate is set at approximately 210 ℃ , which
is in the middle of each temperature range for a reflow. A kapton
sheet is selected as the base sheet because it is resistant to high tem-
peratures during a reflow. In general PET sheets, high-temperature
creep occurs at approximately 80 ℃ , which causes strain under
high-temperature conditions; therefore, a kapton sheet, which has
a heat resistance of over 300℃ , is used as the base sheet. For the
liquid flow channel, VHB (with its excellent sealing performance)
is used, and then, an acrylic plate is used to cover the channel as a
protective plate. This acrylic plate is also connected to the fitting
of the tube, which serves as the flow path. The VHB and acrylic
plates are processed using a laser cutter (VLS3.60DT).
One-touch fitting for piping is used for the connection between
the tube of the flow path and the Pump module. This one-touch
fitting allows an easy installation and removal of the tubing, thus
allowing for the easy design of the flow path. By wrapping the
sealing tape around this fitting and attaching it to the acrylic plate
of the pump module, we can prevent leaks and easily create a flow
path. This one-touch fitting is the POL6-M5M (PISCO), which is
compact and can change the flow path. The POL6-M5M can be
oriented in a 360° direction, which allows us to freely decide the
direction of the tube to be connected to the pump module and
consequently freely decide the direction of the flow path.
The layout of the electrodes is designed based on the comb-
shaped electrodes of Stretchable pump [6, 7]. For the EHD phenom-
enon to occur, an electric field must be generated, and there is a
correlation between the magnitude of the electric field and the mag-
nitude of the pressure of the liquid. Therefore, to generate as large
an electric field as possible, it is necessary to create electrodes with
the narrowest possible distance between them. The distance be-
tween the electrodes required to generate an electric field is0.5 mm,
which is the smallest distance that can be achieved based on the
processing accuracy of the cutting plotter (silhouette CAMEO4).
The width between the pair of electrodes needs to be sufficiently
wide to avoid canceling out the direction of the electric field. In the
previous study [48], the optimal distance between electrode pairs
for power density was shown by comparative experiments and
electric field analysis to be about three times the distance between
electrodes. In the same way, the distance between electrode pairs is
set to 1.5 mm, which is three times the distance between electrodes.
An actual electrode designed using these parameters is shown in
Fig. 10. Also, metal materials are more suitable for electrodes in
terms of operational stability and lifetime than non-metal materials
[7]. Here, we adopt copper because of its high availability and ease
of fabrication. The dielectric liquid used is 3M’s Novec 7100, which
has a high dielectric constant that affects the force acting on the
fluid.
Figure 9: System diagram of the Pump module
Figure 10: Implement comb-shaped electrodes
4.2 Actuate module
Fig. 11 shows a system diagram of the Actuate module, and Fig. 12
shows the system design of the Actuate module. The Actuate mod-
ule, similar to the Pump module, is sufficiently small to fit in the
palm of the hand (23 mm × 48 mm × 25 mm). The Actuate module
is capable of wirelessly controlling high voltages of 1k to 10 kV, and
by connecting it to the pump module, the EHD phenomenon can
be generated, and the pump function can be driven.
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
The main processor of the Actuate module is an ATMEGA328P-
AU, which can be controlled in a general-purpose Arduino environ-
ment. The system is powered by a one-cell lithium polymer battery.
A TPS61200 is used as the DC-DC converter to boost the voltage
from the battery by 3.7 V. The TPS61200 is capable of boosting the
input voltage from 0.3 V to 5 V, allowing the system to run for a
lengthy period of time. This makes it possible to use the system
while wearing it on the body and carrying it around, similar to
wearable and mobile use.
For the wireless function, we use a2.4 GHz radio called nRF24L01+
(Nordic Semiconductors). HydroMod uses its own wireless protocol
instead of standard wireless protocols such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi.
This is because it allows multiple modules to be controlled wire-
lessly without a significant delay. Furthermore, it can be operated
for a lengthy amount of time because it can be driven with a lower
power consumption than other wireless standards.
The HVBT-10P-5 (Matsudate Precision Inc.) is used for the high-
voltage supply of the EHD pump. The HVBT-10P-5 is a 21.59 mm
cubic voltage amplifier, which can freely control the high voltage
from 1k to 10 kV through PWM signals from a microcontroller.
Neodymium magnets are used for the connections of other mod-
ules, enabling the connection of the modules, including electrical
connections.
Compared with the conventional high-voltage supply environ-
ment, the proposed Actuate module has significant advantages in
terms of its small size, low power consumption, long operation
time, and wireless programmable control.
Figure 11: System diagram of the Actuate module
4.3 Wire module
Fig. 13 shows the system diagram of the Wire module, which acts as
conductive wiring in the electrical connection between each mod-
ule and is used to increase the flexibility of the module arrangement.
As described above, the Pump module has the characteristic of in-
creasing the pressure when connected in series and increasing the
flow rate when connected in parallel. However, when connecting
modules in series, for example, there are cases where a large width
is required. In addition, depending on the fluid system to be proto-
typed, it may not always be possible to connect the Pump module
and Actuate module in close proximity. In such a case, the Wire
module can be used to place each module in the desired location
while maintaining the electrical connection. This eliminates the
Figure 12: System design of the Actuate module
limitation of module placement for users and allows them to freely
design an intuitive liquid fluid system.
The Wire module is a simple structure consisting of copper tape
attached to a Kapton sheet and neodymium magnets attached to the
four ends of the tape through reflow soldering. If the positive and
negative electrodes are too close together when a high voltage is
applied, an insulation breakdown occurs in the air, causing sparks.
To prevent this, a sheet-like structure is used to maintain a sufficient
distance between the positive and negative electrodes.
Because of the simple structure of the Wire module as described
above, it can be prepared in various shapes as long as it is in sheet
form. Therefore, it has a wide variety of shapes and arrangements
for fluid prototyping.
Figure 13: System diagram of the Wire module
4.4 Additional Parts
When prototyping a fluid system using HydroMod, basically the
Pump module, Actuate module, and Wire module described above
are combined for prototyping. In addition to these three modules,
Fig. 14 shows the additional parts that are required to build a fluid
system. The additional parts include tubes that serve as flow paths
for the liquid, connectors that connect the flow paths, a small tank
to store the liquid, and a battery to drive the Actuate module.
There are two types of tubing, soft and hard, that serve as fluid
flow paths. The user selects and uses them according to the fluid
system they want to create. One-touch fittings that allow easy in-
stallation and removal of tubes are used for the connectors that
HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
connect the flow paths. Because there are various shapes of con-
nectors such as right angle, T-shape, and cross shapes, users can
easily design the desired system. In addition, by using different
diameter connectors with different tube diameters, a wide range of
fluid designs is possible, such as adjusting the flow rate of a tube
that serves as a localized flow path. In addition, a small tank is used
to match the flow rate used in the fluid system. If necessary, a small
tank can be attached to the pump module, which greatly expands
the possible applications. A one-cell lithium polymer battery is used
to drive the Actuate module, and is available in three capacities:
40 mAh, 110 mAh, and 400 mAh. If building as small a fluid system
as possible, a battery with a smaller capacity should be chosen, and
if building a system to operate for a long time, a battery with a
larger capacity should be used.
Figure 14: System diagram of the additional parts: (A) tubes
including soft and hard types that serve as fluid flow paths,
(B) connectors that connect the flow paths, (C) small tank
that store the liquid, (D) battery that drive the Actuate mod-
ule.
4.5 Software
For the software implementation of HydroMod, we will summarize
the wireless communication function and the GUI functions below.
Fig. 15 shows the system design of the wireless communication
architecture. The flow of the control signals is as follows: First,
control signals are sent from user equipment such as smartphones
or computers. The signals are then aggregated at the base station,
and the base station delivers the signals to the Actuate module of
each HydroMod to drive the pump. At this time, Wi-Fi is used for
general communication between the user equipment and base sta-
tion such that it can be used universally applied. Between the base
station and the Actuate Module, an original wireless protocol using
nRF24L01+ is used to control multiple modules simultaneously with
low latency and low power consumption. In addition, nRF24L01+
supports programmable output powers of0 dBm, −6 dBm, −12 dBm
or −18 dBm. The power consumption when transmitting at 0 dBm
is approximately 12 mA, which is lower than that of a single LED.
The system proposed in this study adopts the on-board antenna
of the nRF24L01+ module. By doing so, the overall size of the sys-
tem can be made more compact, while allowing communication
at 100 m in an outdoor environment. In an indoor environment,
although the radio communication distance may be slightly shorter
owing to radio interference caused by walls and obstacles, wireless
communication with a sufficient transmission distance is possible.
To realize this wireless communication system, the base station is
composed of nRF24L01+ and ESP-WROOM-32D.
Figure 15: System design of wireless communication
Figure 16: HydroMod GUI software: (a) the wireless connec-
tion between smartphone and HydroMod, (b) the function
to calibrate pump power upper limit for individual Hydro-
Mod, (c) the function to operate individual HydroMod, (d)
the function to operate some HydroMods synchronously.
The GUI of HydroMod was designed to be intuitive and versatile
enough to suit a wide range of user applications allowing novice
users to handle it. The GUI runs on a smart phone, which is the
user equipment shown in Fig. 15. Considering the fact that it does
not depend on hardware, this GUI software is implemented using
Blynk, an IoT platform.
Fig. 16 shows the GUI software screen that controls the Hy-
droMod. The HydroMod GUI software has four major functions.
(a) First, it has the ability to wirelessly connect the smartphone,
which is the user equipment where the GUI software runs, to the
respective HydroMod modules through the base station. (b) Second,
there is a calibration function that sets the upper limit of the pump
output for each HydroMod. (c) Third, the GUI has the ability to run
the pump function of each HydroMod at any output. (d) Finally, it
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
allows multiple HydroMod to be synchronized to control a specific
fluid pattern. As an intuitive operation, the user can freely set the
upper limit of the pump output, and any pump can be operated
at the desired output. For the programmable control of multiple
synchronized HydroMods, several patterns are prepared in advance
and can be selected by the user to operate the pump. The pattern
types can be freely prepared in the Arduino environment at the
base station.
This system not only facilitates fluid prototyping it, but also has
the potential to create new fluid expressions such as controlling
multiple pumps simultaneously with a smartphone. We also believe
that it will lower the barrier to entry for fluid prototyping because
anyone can operate it intuitively.
5 EV ALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance and reconfigurability
of the pump module, which provide the pump function of Hydro-
Mod. In addition, we describe the evaluation results regarding the
quietness and continuous operating time, which are the features of
our proposal.
5.1 Performance and Reconfigurability of
Pump module
We have conducted evaluation experiments on the basic perfor-
mance of the Pump module, which is the pump function of Hydro-
Mod, and summarize the results. We also evaluate the relationship
between the applied electric field and the pressure, and between
the applied electric field and the flow rate.
The parameters of the electrodes of the pump module are a
0.5 mm distance between electrodes, a 1.5 mm distance between
electrode pairs, and 10 electrode pairs. As the measurement device,
an HJPQ-30P1(Matsusada Precision Inc.) is used as the power supply
device to apply the applied voltage, a GP-M001T(KEYENCE) as the
pressure sensor, and an FD-XS8(KEYENCE) as the flow sensor. As
the dielectric liquid, we used a Novec 7100 from 3M, which has a
relative dielectric constant of 7.52 and a density of 1520 kg/m3.
We evaluated the performance of several pump modules con-
nected in series and in parallel. Three pump modules were used
for the measurements. The relationship between the voltage and
pressure when the modules are connected in series is shown in
Fig. 17, and the relationship between the voltage and flow rate is
shown in Fig. 18. When connected in parallel, Fig. 19 shows the
relationship between voltage and pressure, and Fig. 20 shows the
relationship between voltage and flow rate. The results show that
the pressure increases by connecting the pump modules in series,
and the flow rate increases by connecting them in parallel. In addi-
tion, the maximum value of the output is extended according to the
number of pump modules. In this way, depending on the number of
Pump modules and how they are combined, it is possible to design
a tangible fluid system that considers the pressure and flow rate.
Furthermore, the magnitudes of the pump pressure and flow rate
measured in this study are sufficiently large to be used as a driving
source for soft robotics or fluid interfaces.
0 1 2 3 4 5
V oltage [kV]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0Pressure [kPa]
1 Pump module
2 Pump modules in Series
3 Pump modules in Series
Figure 17: Relationship between applied high voltage and
pressure in series
0 1 2 3 4 5
V oltage [kV]
0
50
100
150
200
250Flow rate [ml/min]
1 Pump module
2 Pump modules in Series
3 Pump modules in Series
Figure 18: Relationship between applied high voltage and
flow rate in series
5.2 Silent Performance
The EHD pump adopted in this proposal produces less noise in
principle, and here we evaluate how quiet it is. When the HydroMod
was driven in a room with a noise level of approximately 35 dB, no
change owing to the noise level occurred. In general, the standard
for describing quietness is 35 dB, and thus we can state that the
HydroMod has almost no drive noise. The noise level of a normal
mechanical pump is too high to be used as an actuator in soft
robotics or as a representation of a liquid display; therefore the
proposed pump module is expected to be highly versatile in its
applications.
5.3 Mobile Operation Time
In this study, we have measured the maximum time that the Hydro-
Mod can run on battery power. When the HydroMod was run on a
40 mAh lithium polymer battery, the run time was approximately
33 min; when it was run on a110 mAh lithium polymer battery, the
run time was approximately 1 h and 45 min; and when it was run
HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
0 1 2 3 4 5
V oltage [kV]
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0Pressure [kPa]
1 Pump module
2 Pump modules in Parallel
3 Pump modules in Parallel
Figure 19: Relationship between applied high voltage and
pressure in parallel
0 1 2 3 4 5
V oltage [kV]
0
50
100
150
200
250Flow rate [ml/min]
1 Pump module
2 Pump modules in Parallel
3 Pump modules in Parallel
Figure 20: Relationship between applied high voltage and
flow rate in parallel
on a 400 mAh lithium polymer battery, the run time was approxi-
mately 5 h and 31 min. This result shows that the HydroMod has
the advantage of being able to drive for a lengthy period of time as a
pump function. Therefore, it can sufficiently meet the requirements
of a long-term operation for wearable and mobile devices.
6 APPLICATIONS
As the main feature of HydroMod is that it can generate liquid flow
by simply combining modules, and the pressure and flow rate of
the fluid system can be changed depending on how the modules are
combined. In addition, because each module is small, independent,
and wirelessly driven, it is possible to create expressions using
fluids that are not been possible with conventional fluid systems.
In this section, we present three interactive prototypes and appli-
cation scenarios using the novel fluid prototyping features with
HydroMod.
6.1 Actuated Seesaw
When constructing a fluid system for a liquid, it is usually necessary
to determine specifications such as the location of pumps, tanks,
and valves in advance, and then carefully design and simulate them
before construction. This makes it difficult to reconfigure the system
once it has been built, and it also requires a significant amount of
time to accurately design the system without knowledge of fluids.
In contrast, HydroMod allows intuitive design of a fluid system by
simply combining modules and checking the strength of the liquid
flow.
As an application using the aforementioned characteristics, Fig. 21
shows a seesaw object created by combining the modules of Hy-
droMod. By moving the liquid inside the hard tube and tank, the
position of the center of gravity is changed, and it functions as
an actuator with kinetic movement. By alternately driving two
Actuate modules with different voltage application directions, the
liquid moves left and right inside the tube and tank, and the tilt of
the seesaw changes as the center of gravity shifts. In addition, the
timing and strength of the pump drive can be controlled remotely
through wireless communication, and it is possible to implement
with less wiring that does not interfere with the movement of the
seesaw. This application is also an example of the use of weight
manipulation, which is one of the properties of liquids.
Figure 21: Actuated seesaw. (A) (B) HydroMod allows intu-
itive design of a fluid system by simply combining modules.
(C) It creates a fluid flow and sends it to the face of the see-
saw. (D) Kinetic movements are created by moving the liquid
inside the object and changing the position of the center of
gravity.
6.2 Silent Pin-based Color Display
The pin-based display, in which rod-shaped objects are arranged, is
widely used in the field of interaction because it can be expressed
intuitively. However, pin-based displays often use mechanical actu-
ators [10] [31] [57] and the loudness of drive noise is considered
to be an issue. There have been several studies on liquid-based
displays, but they require large external devices such as pumps and
tanks, and the loud drive noise is a problem, as with mechanical
actuators [19] [43] [15]. In contrast, the HydroMod can operate as
quietly as a typical quiet actuator [4] [17] [38], which is reported
to operate below 16dB, and is also small enough to avoid making
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
the system larger. In addition, when fluids are handled in multi-
ple locations, it has been possible to branch the flow generated by
the pump [43] or disperse it by controlling the time interval [19]
, but it is difficult to perform synchronized liquid control at each
drive location conventionally. However, HydroMod can generate
flow in each module and synchronize the modules through wire-
less communication to enable synchronized control at each drive
location.
As an application using the aforementioned characteristics, Fig. 22
shows a silent pin-based color display created by combining Hy-
droMod. This pin-based display can silently show a liquid rep-
resentation synchronized at each drive location, such as a wave
representation. The colored water is controlled by utilizing the
separation characteristics of the liquid. Novec 7100, which is used
as a dielectric liquid, has a high density and is hydrophobic, so it
is separated from water. When colored water is placed on Novec
7100, Novec 7100 can push the colored water upward, so the colored
water can be controlled variably, and it is expressed as a display.
This application is based on the application of color expression,
which is one of the properties of liquids.
Figure 22: Silent pin-based color display. (A) The liquid in
the vertical pin is controlled in an upward and downward di-
rection. (B) By having multiple modules working in synchro-
nization, synchronized liquid expression can be achieved at
each driving location. (C) (D) The colored water is controlled
by utilizing the separation characteristics of the liquid.
6.3 Wearable Mobile Fluid Interface
In the field of HCI, several fluid interactive interfaces, such as
HydroRing [16] and ThermoCaress [24], have been proposed for
wearable use. Although they are intended for wearable use, they
require large external devices such as pumps and tanks, and cannot
be used for mobile use such as while moving around in daily life.
In contrast, HydroMod is composed of a combination of palm-sized
modules that allows for the portable use of fluid systems, which
has been difficult with conventional fluid systems.
As an application using the aforementioned characteristics, Fig. 22
shows a wearable mobile fluid interface created by combining Hy-
droMod. This is a wearable interface that can control cooling by
liquid, and can be used for mobile applications, such as moving
around or going outside. This interface shows an application sce-
nario in which we will be able to wear and live with fluid interfaces
in the future, just as we do with smart watches today. This applica-
tion is based on the application of heating/cooling control, which
is one of the properties of liquids.
Figure 23: Wearable mobile fluid interface. (A) A wearable
fluid device that can control cooling without external large
devices (B) The pressure can be increased by connecting the
Pump modules in series.
Figure 24: Cooling the body with wearable mobile fluid in-
terface.
7 DISCUSSION
In this section, we first describe safety using high voltage. Next, we
describe the limitations and future work of our proposed system.
7.1 Safety of Proposed System Using High
Voltage
It is essential to consider the effects on the human body when using
a high voltage. Although our proposed system deals with a high
voltage from 1 to 10 kV to drive the EHD, there is little risk to the
human body from electric shock. The symptoms of electric shock
are not caused by the voltage, but by the amount and location of
the current flowing through the body. According to Matsusada
Precision Inc., a manufacturer of high-voltage equipment, a shock
of 1 mA to 5 mA is equivalent to static electricity, and a shock of
50 mA or more can cause death. The HVBT-10P-5 cubic voltage
amplifier used in our proposed system has a maximum output power
of 0.5 W and a maximum output current of 1.6 mA. Moreover, in
the EHD mechanism, the charge X − injected from the electrode
is minute, so the current generated by the pump module is small
in principle. Even if users touch the applied voltage, there is less
danger to the human body. Furthermore, in the case of wearable
use of the proposed system, a protective cover is attached to the
electrodes, and a 0.5 mm thick insulating rubber sheet is placed
between the module and the human body as a protective layer to
prevent electric shock.
HydroMod : Constructive Modules for Prototyping Hydraulic Physical Interfaces CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
7.2 Limitation
7.2.1 Size and softness of the modules. The Pump module is 20 mm
× 70 mm × 10 mm, and the Actuate module is 23 mm × 48 mm ×
25 mm. This is sufficiently small for a module, including the power
supply. However, the height of the module is slightly large owing
to the shape of the cubic-voltage amplifier adopted in our proposed
system. In the future, we would like to consider further downsizing
of the module, such as applying a Cockcroft-Walton circuit to boost
the power supply.
It is also known that the comb-shaped electrodes of the EHD
pump can be mounted in various shapes including 3D objects [12],
and in a soft and stretchable state by devising materials [7]. In the
future, we believe that the softness and deformability of the module
itself will allow for more flexible implementations.
7.2.2 Control of the flow direction. In the proposed Actuate mod-
ule, the direction of the voltage application is fixed in a single
direction. By contrast, the EHD pump has a property in which the
liquid flows in the opposite direction when the direction of the
voltage application is reversed. It is currently easy to switch the
direction of a liquid flow by installing the module in the opposite
direction; however, if we can install a function to switch the direc-
tion of the voltage application in the Actuate module in the future,
we believe it will enable a more programmable fluid control.
7.2.3 Programming environment. The HydroMod proposed in this
study can be developed using Arduino because it adopts ATMEGA328P-
AU as the main processor. We have currently only implemented
simple software to switch the voltage of each Actuate module and
to select the synchronous fluid pattern using GUI. In the future, we
will incorporate additional functions, such as a timeline design and
interactions with sensor inputs.
7.2.4 User study. In our study, a feedback summarization from ac-
tual users has yet to be completed. The next step will be to evaluate
the usability of the device through workshops and obtain more
feedback and examples. In addition, it will be necessary to create a
community of prototyping toolkits for liquid fluid systems. In the
future, we would like to make HydroMod open source and build a
community of users.
8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, with the aim of lowering the barrier to entry for pro-
totyping with liquids, we proposed HydroMod, novel constructive
modules that can easily generate and programmatically control
liquid flow. HydroMod consists of small modules that can fit in
the palm of the hand, eliminating the need for large external de-
vices that are essential in conventional fluid systems. Moreover,
by intuitively combining modules, it is possible to create a design
in consideration of the magnitude of the pressure and flow rate;
therefore, an interaction using a fluid has significant applicability.
Furthermore, it is easy to reconstruct flow paths, which is easy to
handle as a fluid device. We also proposed three application scenar-
ios for HydroMod to demonstrate the possibilities of this new fluid
system.
The contributions described in this paper will allow prototyping
in the field of programmable materials that is easily accessible to
anyone without specialist knowledge. We hope that fluid interfaces
with liquids will become a part of our daily lives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H04
882, Japan. We appreciate Keisuke Watanabe for the support in
creating videos and diagrams, and the members at xlab for many
fruitful discussions and their feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] Programmable Air. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://www.
programmableair.com/.
[2] Arduino. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from www.arduino.cc./.
[3] P. Atten and J. Seyed-Yagoobi. 2003. Electrohydrodynamically induced dielectric
liquid flow through pure conduction in point/plane geometry. IEEE Transactions
on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 10, 1 (2003), 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TDEI.2003.1176555
[4] Yoseph Bar-Cohen, T Xue, Mohsen Shahinpoor, Joycelyn S Harrison, and Joseph G
Smith. 1998. Low-mass muscle actuators using electroactive polymers (EAP).
In Smart Structures and Materials 1998: Smart Materials Technologies , Vol. 3324.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 218–223.
[5] Ayah Bdeir and Ted Ullrich. 2010. Electronics as Material: LittleBits. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Funchal, Portugal) (TEI ’11). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 341–344. https://doi.org/10.1145/1935701.1935781
[6] Vito Cacucciolo, Hiroyuki Nabae, Koichi Suzumori, and Herbert Shea. 2020.
Electrically-Driven Soft Fluidic Actuators Combining Stretchable Pumps With
Thin McKibben Muscles. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 6 (2020), 146. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00146
[7] Vito Cacucciolo, Jun Shintake, Yu Kuwajima, Shingo Maeda, Dario Floreano, and
Herbert Shea. 2019. Stretchable pumps for soft machines. Nature 572, 7770 (2019),
516–519. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1479-6
[8] J Darabi and K Ekula. 2003. Development of a chip-integrated micro cooling
device. Microelectronics Journal 34, 11 (2003), 1067–1074. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.mejo.2003.09.010
[9] Alexandra Delazio, Ken Nakagaki, Roberta L. Klatzky, Scott E. Hudson, Jill Fain
Lehman, and Alanson P. Sample. 2018. Force Jacket: Pneumatically-Actuated
Jacket for Embodied Haptic Experiences . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173894
[10] Sean Follmer, Daniel Leithinger, Alex Olwal, Akimitsu Hogge, and Hiroshi Ishii.
2013. InFORM: Dynamic Physical Affordances and Constraints through Shape
and Object Actuation. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (St. Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom)
(UIST ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 417–426.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502032
[11] Juri Fujii, Takuya Matsunobu, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2018. COLORISE: Shape- and
Color-Changing Pixels with Inflatable Elastomers and Interactions. InProceedings
of the Twelfth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Stockholm, Sweden) (TEI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 199–204. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173225.3173228
[12] Juri Fujii, Satoshi Nakamaru, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2021. LayerPump: Rapid
Prototyping of Functional 3D Objects with Built-in Electrohydrodynamics Pumps
Based on Layered Plates. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference
on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (Salzburg, Austria) (TEI ’21).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 48, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3430524.3442453
[13] Emmanouil D Fylladitakis, Michael P Theodoridis, and Antonios X Moronis. 2014.
Review on the history, research, and applications of electrohydrodynamics. IEEE
Transactions on Plasma Science 42, 2 (2014), 358–375.
[14] M Garrad, Gabor Soter, AT Conn, Helmut Hauser, and Jonathan Rossiter. 2019.
A soft matter computer for soft robots. Science Robotics 4, 33 (2019).
[15] Julian Goldman and Victoria Manganiello. 2020. Computer1.0. Retrieved August
27, 2021 from https://vimeo.com/22390871/.
[16] Teng Han, Fraser Anderson, Pourang Irani, and Tovi Grossman. 2018. HydroR-
ing: Supporting Mixed Reality Haptics Using Liquid Flow. In Proceedings of the
31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Berlin,
Germany) (UIST ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
913–925. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242667
[17] Felix Heibeck, Basheer Tome, Clark Della Silva, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2015. UniMorph:
Fabricating Thin Film Composites for Shape-Changing Interfaces. In Proceedings
of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology
(Charlotte, NC, USA) (UIST ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 233–242. https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807472
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA Morita, Kuwajima, Minaminosono, Maeda and Kakehi
[18] Donal Holland, Colette Abah, Marielena Velasco Enriquez, Maxwell Herman,
Gareth Bennett, Emir Vela, and Conor Walsh. 2017. The Soft Robotics Toolkit:
Strategies for Overcoming Obstacles to the Wide Dissemination of Soft-Robotic
Hardware. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine PP (02 2017), 1–1. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2016.2639067
[19] Yuki Inoue, Yuichi Itoh, and Takao Onoye. 2018. TuVe: A Flexible Display with
a Tube. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2018 Emerging Technologies (Tokyo, Japan) (SA ’18).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 16, 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3275476.3275487
[20] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Jason McPeak, Alexander Jiao, Liang He, Thomas Outing,
and Jon E. Froehlich. 2017. MakerWear: A Tangible Approach to Interactive Wear-
able Creation for Children . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 133–145. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025887
[21] Yu Kuwajima, Hiroki Shigemune, Vito Cacucciolo, Matteo Cianchetti, Cecilia
Laschi, and Shingo Maeda. 2017. Active suction cup actuated by ElectroHydro-
Dynamics phenomenon. IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems 2017-Septe, September (2017), 470–475. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.
2017.8202195
[22] Mannu Lambrichts, Jose Maria Tijerina, and Raf Ramakers. 2020. SoftMod: A Soft
Modular Plug-and-Play Kit for Prototyping Electronic Systems. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Sydney NSW, Australia) (TEI ’20). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 287–298. https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374950
[23] Cecilia Laschi. 2017. Octobot - A robot octopus points the way to soft robotics.
IEEE Spectrum 54, 3 (2017), 38–43. https://doi.org/10.1109/MSPEC.2017.7864755
[24] Yuhu Liu, Satoshi Nishikawa, Young ah Seong, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yasuo
Kuniyoshi. 2021. ThermoCaress: A Wearable Haptic Device with Illusory Moving
Thermal Stimulation. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445777
[25] Makeblock. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://www.makeblock.com/.
[26] Mbed. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://os.mbed.com/.
[27] MESH. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://meshprj.com/en/.
[28] Lego Mindstorms. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://www.lego.com/
en-us/themes/mindstorms/.
[29] Hila Mor, Ken Nakagaki, Yu Tianyu, Benjamin Harvey Miller, Yichen Jia, and
Hiroshi Ishii. 2020. Prototyping Interactive Fluidic Mechanisms. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (Sydney NSW, Australia) (TEI ’20). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 881–884. https://doi.org/10.1145/3374920.3374967
[30] Hila Mor, Tianyu Yu, Ken Nakagaki, Benjamin Harvey Miller, Yichen Jia, and
Hiroshi Ishii. 2020. Venous Materials: Towards Interactive Fluidic Mechanisms .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3313831.3376129
[31] Ken Nakagaki, Daniel Fitzgerald, Zhiyao (John) Ma, Luke Vink, Daniel Levine,
and Hiroshi Ishii. 2019. InFORCE: Bi-Directional ‘Force’ Shape Display for
Haptic Interaction. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (Tempe, Arizona, USA) (TEI ’19).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 615–623. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3294109.3295621
[32] Kenichi Nakahara, Koya Narumi, Ryuma Niiyama, and Yoshihiro Kawahara. 2017.
Electric phase-change actuator with inkjet printed flexible circuit for printable
and integrated robot prototyping. In2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). 1856–1863. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989217
[33] Ryosuke Nakayama, Ryo Suzuki, Satoshi Nakamaru, Ryuma Niiyama, Yoshihiro
Kawahara, and Yasuaki Kakehi. 2019. MorphIO: Entirely Soft Sensing and Actua-
tion Modules for Programming Shape Changes through Tangible Interaction. In
Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference (San Diego,
CA, USA) (DIS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
975–986. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322337
[34] Ryuma Niiyama, Daniela Rus, and Sangbae Kim. 2014. Pouch Motors: Print-
able/inflatable soft actuators for robotics. In 2014 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . 6332–6337. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.
2014.6907793
[35] Ryuma Niiyama, Xu Sun, Cynthia Sung, Byoungkwon An, Daniela Rus, and
Sangbae Kim. 2015. Pouch Motors: Printable Soft Actuators Integrated with
Computational Design. Soft Robotics 2 (05 2015), 150508072946000. https:
//doi.org/10.1089/soro.2014.0023
[36] Jifei Ou, Felix Heibeck, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2016. TEI 2016 Studio: Inflated Curiosity.
In Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (TEI ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 766–769. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2839462.2854119
[37] Ahmed Ould El Moctar, Nadine Aubry, and John Batton. 2003. Electro-
hydrodynamic micro-fluidic mixer. Lab on a Chip 3, 4 (2003), 273–280. https:
//doi.org/10.1039/b306868b
[38] Ron Pelrine, Roy Kornbluh, Qibing Pei, and Jose Joseph. 2000. High-speed
electrically actuated elastomers with strain greater than 100%. Science 287, 5454
(2000), 836–839.
[39] Raspberry Pi. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from www.raspberrypi.org./.
[40] William F. Pickard. 1963. Ion Drag Pumping. I. Theory. Journal of Applied Physics
34, 2 (1963), 246–250. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1702592
[41] William F. Pickard. 1963. Ion Drag Pumping. II. Experiment. Journal of Applied
Physics 34, 2 (1963), 251–258. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1702593
[42] Pneuduino. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://pneuduino.org/.
[43] Julius Popp. 2011. Bit.Flow. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://vimeo.com/
22390871/.
[44] Axel Richter and Hermann Sandmaier. 1990. An electrohydrodynamic microp-
ump. In IEEE Proceedings on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, An Investigation of
Micro Structures, Sensors, Actuators, Machines and Robots. IEEE, New York, NY,
USA, 99–104.
[45] Tasuku Sato, Yoko Yamanishi, Vito Cacucciolo, Yu Kuwajima, Hiroki Shigemune,
Matteo Cianchetti, Cecilia Laschi, and Shingo Maeda. 2017. Electrohydrodynamic
conduction pump with asymmetrical electrode structures in the microchannels.
Chemistry Letters 46, 7 (2017), 950–952.
[46] Eric Schweikardt and Mark D. Gross. 2006. RoBlocks: A Robotic Construc-
tion Kit for Mathematics and Science Education. In Proceedings of the 8th In-
ternational Conference on Multimodal Interfaces (Banff, Alberta, Canada) (ICMI
’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 72–75. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1180995.1181010
[47] Scratch. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://scratch.mit.edu.
[48] Yumeta Seki, Yu Kuwajima, Hiroki Shigemune, Yuhei Yamada, and Shingo Maeda.
2020. Optimization of the electrode arrangement and reliable fabrication of
flexible ehd pumps. Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics 32, 5 (2020), 939–946.
[49] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry
Pi” for Soft Robotics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[50] Gabor Soter, Martin Garrad, Andrew Conn, Helmut Hauser, and Jonathan
Rossiter. 2019. Skinflow: A soft robotic skin based on fluidic transmission.
In IEEE International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) 2019 . Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), United States, 355–360. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ROBOSOFT.2019.8722744 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Soft Robotics, RoboSoft 2019 ; Conference date: 14-04-2019 Through 18-04-
2019.
[51] Wei Sun, Yanjun Chen, Simon Zhan, Teng Han, Feng Tian, Hongan Wang, and
Xing-Dong Yang. 2021. RElectrode: A Reconfigurable Electrode For Multi-Purpose
Sensing Based on Microfluidics. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445652
[52] Toio. 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021 from https://toio.io/.
[53] Michael Wehner, Ryan Truby, Daniel Fitzgerald, Bobak Mosadegh, George White-
sides, Jennifer Lewis, and Robert Wood. 2016. An integrated design and fabrica-
tion strategy for entirely soft, autonomous robots. Nature 536 (08 2016), 451–455.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19100
[54] George M. Whitesides. 2006. The origins and the future of microfluidics. Nature
442 (2006), 368–373. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05058
[55] Lining Yao, Ryuma Niiyama, Jifei Ou, Sean Follmer, Clark Della Silva, and Hiroshi
Ishii. 2013. PneUI: Pneumatically Actuated Soft Composite Materials for Shape
Changing Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (St. Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom)
(UIST ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 13–22.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502037
[56] Dong Hyun Yoon, Hironobu Sato, Asahi Nakahara, Tetsushi Sekiguchi, Satoshi
Konishi, and Shuichi Shoji. 2014. Development of an electrohydrodynamic
ion-drag micropump using three-dimensional carbon micromesh electrodes.
Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 24, 9 (jul 2014), 095003. https:
//doi.org/10.1088/0960-1317/24/9/095003
[57] Shigeo Yoshida, Yuqian Sun, and Hideaki Kuzuoka. 2020. PoCoPo: Handheld
Pin-Based Shape Display for Haptic Rendering in Virtual Reality . Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3313831.3376358