Designing and Fabricating Pneumatic Textures for Human-Robot
Interaction
Yuhan Hu
Cornell University
Ithaca, US
yh758@cornell.edu
Guy Hoffman
Cornell University
Ithaca, US
hoffman@cornell.edu
Figure 1: A collection of skin texture modules, including wrinkles (b), pores (c), tentacles (d), suction cups (e), scales (f),
goosebumps and spikes (g), and circular wrinkles (h).
ABSTRACT
Inspired by biological systems that use skin textures to display emo-
tions, we designed soft pneumatic textures for interactive robots to
communicate their internal states visually and haptically. In this
paper, we present our developmental process of creating new forms
and behaviors of soft surface textures. A bio-inspired approach
was used in ideating and prototyping texture patterns for natu-
ral communication. We discuss challenges we encountered when
fabricating and actuating the textures, present potential solutions
and compare different alternatives. We hope the documentation
of our design and fabrication process can make the technology
more accessible to researchers in human-robot interaction field,
and serve as an inspiration for further research and development
of pneumatic and expressive skin textures.
KEYWORDS
soft robot, skin, textures, human-robot interaction, haptics, bio-
inspired design, pneumatics
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’22, April 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Reference Format:
Yuhan Hu and Guy Hoffman. 2018. Designing and Fabricating Pneumatic
Textures for Human-Robot Interaction. In CHI ’22: ACM CHI workshop: Ac-
tuated Materials and Soft Robotics Strategies for Human-Computer Interaction
Design, April 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
4 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we discuss challenges and solutions of designing
and integrating soft robotic skin with pneumatic textures. Inspired
by biological systems displaying changes to their skin textures to
reflect internal states, such as human goosebumps and cats’ back fur
raising, we developed an expressive channel for interactive robots
in the form of texture change on a soft skin [7]. Our preliminary user
study indicated that a robot’s texture changes can be a promising
channel for communicating specific emotions, such as excitement,
anger, sleepiness and sadness, while users observe or touch the
textures [5].
To integrate skin changes, we designed pneumatically actuated
shape changing texture arrays, that deform in response to pres-
sure changes inside fluidic chambers. We explored realistic and
meaningful structures of such shape-changing texture units, and
presented a texture vocabulary in [6] that generates different visual
and haptic experiences.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No.1830471.
CHI ’22, April 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA Hu and Hoffman.
In this paper, we share our design approaches and some chal-
lenges we faced during the developmental process of soft textures.
A bio-inspired approach is used to ideate new forms and behav-
iors of texture change, which are then modeled into mechanical
design with different options of design parameters. To manufacture
such textures, we discuss the challenges of fabricating surfaces
with unique structures and present our solution of molding both
internal chambers and external structures. Several limitations are
discussed with potential alternatives mentioned. To actuate and
control the textures, we compare two actuation systems, one with
pneumatic pumps and one with powered syringes for their use in
human-robot interaction contexts. Finally, we discuss additional
challenges of integrating such soft textures on a social robot and
generate communicative signals in different interaction scenarios.
We hope the documentation of our process and discussion of chal-
lenges can make the technology more accessible to researches in
human-robot interaction field for the exploration of future design
of soft robot skin.
2 DESIGNING AND MODELING SOFT
TEXTURES
Since skin texture change is still an under-explored area in soft
robotics and human-robot interaction (HRI) research, the main
challenge is to identify the design primitives and generate texture
patterns that are meaningful and realizable for HRI scenarios.
We approach this with a bio-inspired design method, explore
forms and shape-changing patterns of skin textures in biological
systems. For example, a human furrowing the eyebrows generates
dynamic wrinkle-like textures on his forehead, expressing states
like confused and concentrated (fig. 2 a). To translate such behav-
ior to robot skin design, we simulate the pattern to develop soft
structures that can change between a flat surface to a furrow when
adding a negative pressure (fig. 2 c). The strip-like air cavity forms
a valley when being vacuumed, with several design parameters
being iterated throughout the model generation process, including
the width (𝑤) and length (𝑙) of the cavity, distance between two
cavities (𝑑), thickness of the top film (𝑡) and the height of the cavity
(ℎ) (fig. 2 b). Such parameters were hand-tuned by iterative proto-
typing and testing to closely mimic wrinkle-like visual effect and
haptic tension.
Parameters were experimented and intuitively decided following
empirical experience on soft material mechanics. For example, a
thinner top wall usually results in a higher deformation, thus a
deeper valley when sucking out the air. However, this process has a
slow iteration cycle and includes many arbitrary choices based on
researchers’ experience. Some software tools allow us to quickly
test and predict with different design parameters and come up
with an optimal solution before physically building the module.
For example, Finite Element Analysis (FEA) can simulate motions
of soft actuators such as bending and linear elongation, predict
motion-force profile for a more efficient system [ 1, 9]. However,
instead of optimizing efficiency or forces as most actuators do,
our research focus on the users’ haptic and visual experience with
textured modules, which are hard to come with the simulation tools
alone. Thus, we iterate our design through physical prototyping
and user testing to get feedback on touch and visual effects, such
as by feeling the tension or roughness of the skin with hand.
After design parameters are fixed for a specific texture pattern,
we integrate them on a skin module. Texture distribution is de-
fined by the shape of the robot surface, degree of freedom (DOF)
for actuation, and the ideal function of the skin. In this example,
the wrinkle textures can be arranged as a double-column parallel
wrinkles on a rectangular module (fig. 2 c) or on a circular module
with radial wrinkles (fig. 2 d) which was designed to fit under a
mushroom robot’s umbrella, simulating mushroom wrinkles. Air
chambers connect all texture elements for uniform deformation. For
skin modules with multiple control DOFs, networks of chambers
can activate groups of textures separately.
3 FABRICATION
Aside from designing texture patterns and iterating design parame-
ters for expressive skin structures, the mechanical realization of the
skin is challenged by some limitations in the fabrication process.
This section presents our fabrication approach and discusses some
challenges we encountered during fabrication.
We use silicone elastomer (Ecoflex 00-30, Smooth-on, Inc) and
an open-faced molding and casting process to fabricate the soft
textures. Molding technique is commonly utilized in the fabrication
of pneumatic soft robots [4, 8, 11]. However, none of them specif-
ically present the molding process of skin textures with unique
and non-flat surface shapes such as spikes and tentacles (see fig. 1
d, g). Our approach uses an assembled molding box to mold such
texture modules. The mold box is composed of two elements, one
for casting the inner air cavity and chambers (fig. 3 a, top), the other
to mold the external structure of the skin surface (fig. 3 a, bottom).
To enhance haptic experience, we embed rigid elements for some
textures, such as embedding sharp, plastic tips when casting spike
textures.
To elaborate the fabrication process, we capture the steps of
fabricating a scale-like texture module in figure 3. Plastic mold
components are 3D-printed using PLA and assembled to form a
mold box (a). Haptic elements could be 3D-printed as well and
embedded within the mold prior to casting (b). Then, we pour the
mixed liquid silicone into the mold to cast the upper part of the
skin (c). After the silicone is cured, we disassemble the mold box
to take out the silicone (d). The bottom layer is fabricated with an
inextensible film (paper) embedded (e). Finally the cured upper part
is attached to the bottom layer to form a closed cavity (f), an air tube
is added and sealed with silicone adhesive (Sil-Poxy, Smooth-on).
We encountered several challenges during the fabrication pro-
cess. First, randomness is introduced in the manual fabrication
steps. Tilted surfaces could be caused by uneven or tilted operation
platform. Skin modules may have a variance of thickness due to
the experimenter’s error in eyeballing the filling level of silicone.
Bubbles could be generated when pouring the liquid elastomer, and
result in leakage and non-uniform deformation. Second, small and
fine textures are hard to achieve. Liquid silicone may not fill in thin
gaps (less than 1mm) due to surface tension and friction with the
mold. Alternatively, a digital light processing 3D printer may allow
for directly printing elastic materials [3], fabricate soft pneumatic
textures of high precision, less randomness and with faster speed.
Designing and Fabricating Pneumatic Textures for Human-Robot Interaction CHI ’22, April 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA
Figure 2: Inspired by dynamic wrinkles on human forehead expressing states like confusion or concentration (a), we model the
mechanical design of wrinkle-like textures to generate similar expression. (b) depicts a top view (top) and a side view (bottom)
of air cavities (gray) and elastomer body (white) with different design parameters. The mechanical patterns are adapted to form
skin modules of different shapes, such as a rectangular skin with parallel wrinkles (c), or a circular mushroom-like skin with
radial wrinkles (d).
Figure 3: Fabrication process of a scale-like texture module:
(a) 3D print mold components; (b) embed haptic elements; (c)
pour liquid silicone into the box to cast the upper part of the
skin; (d) detach the cured silicone from the mold, (e) cast the
bottom part with an inextensible film, and finally (f) bond
the two parts together with additional Ecoflex.
In addition, Ecoflex silicone does not form a tight bonding when
gluing pieces of different materials, such as attaching the haptic
component. Extra adhesive materials need to be applied in order to
confine the elements to withstand users’ touch.
4 CONTROLLING TEXTURE MODULES
To actuate and control the texture modules for use in human-robot
interaction context, the system needs to have a fast response, low
noise profile, and a self-contained size. We compared two powering
systems for potential use: One method uses an air pump controlled
with an array of solenoid valves and a pressure sensor for feed-
back [2]. We came across several challenges with this method: (1)
The rotary pump and solenoid switches are noisy and distracting;
(2) It is difficult to control the position precisely, and it is determined
by the precision of the pressure sensor; (3) The system is inefficient
because of the leakage and exhaust. (4) The skin may burst due
to the failure of control or malfunction of sensors, such as when
inflating too much air into the chamber. [7]
To overcome the above issues, we designed a second system, a
power syringe actuated by a linear stepper motor [7]. This system
has lower noise level, lower risk of burst by applying mechani-
cal constraints, and precisely controlled deformation with prior
calibration of skin and negligible leakage. However, the size of
the powering system is proportionally scaled up by the volume of
air chambers, and the control DOFs. It is difficult to achieve high
frequency responses due to the limited speed of a stepper motor.
Future work will look into more compact and easily controllable
solutions, such as FlowIO [12]
5 INTEGRATING TEXTURE MODULES ON
SOCIAL ROBOTS
Our goal is to integrate skin modules on social robots to enhance
their communication capacity and expression effectiveness. Imple-
menting skin textures on robot surfaces introduce several chal-
lenges and design considerations. First, our method only allows
for the fabrication of a flat skin. Even though the skin module is
bendable, it may not fit well with a robot surface of curvature and
complex geometry. New fabrication methods need to be investi-
gated for realizing curved skin modules. Second, the type of skin
textures and placement needs to match a robot’s form and character.
For example, hair-like textures may only be placed on the back of
a robot’s head instead of on a face. It may not be appropriate to
integrate suction cups on a humanoid robot skin, which may cause
uncanny feelings [10].
Skin texture expression needs to be consistent with other commu-
nicative modalities of a robot to reduce confusion. Texture change
serving as a form of involuntary expression in nature, usually com-
municate in a less noticeable and ambiguous fashion compared to
other expressive channels such as facial expression, speech, and
gestures. Thus, when designing a texture expression for an HRI
application, designers and researchers should set reasonable expec-
tation and consider use cases accordingly. For example, commu-
nication that requires accurate messages with low error tolerance
may not be ideal. The ambiguity may lead to an open interpretation
that varies for different people and interaction scenarios. Future
research will compare and combine texture expression with other
communicative modalities in human-robot interaction studies.
REFERENCES
[1] Gunjan Agarwal, Nicolas Besuchet, Basile Audergon, and Jamie Paik. 2016.
Stretchable materials for robust soft actuators towards assistive wearable devices.
CHI ’22, April 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA Hu and Hoffman.
Scientific reports 6, 1 (2016), 1–8.
[2] Ariel A Calderón, Joakin C Ugalde, Juan Cristóbal Zagal, and Néstor O Pérez-
Arancibia. 2016. Design, fabrication and control of a multi-material-multi-
actuator soft robot inspired by burrowing worms. In 2016 IEEE international
conference on robotics and biomimetics (ROBIO) . IEEE, 31–38.
[3] Lisen Ge, Longteng Dong, Dong Wang, Qi Ge, and Guoying Gu. 2018. A dig-
ital light processing 3D printer for fast and high-precision fabrication of soft
pneumatic actuators. Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 273 (2018), 285–292.
[4] Benjamin Gorissen, Wannes Vincentie, Farid Al-Bender, Dominiek Reynaerts,
and Michaël De Volder. 2013. Modeling and bonding-free fabrication of flexible
fluidic microactuators with a bending motion. Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering 23, 4 (2013), 045012.
[5] Yuhan Hu and Guy Hoffman. 2019. Using skin texture change to design emotion
expression in social robots. In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 2–10.
[6] Yuhan Hu and Guy Hoffman. 2022. What Can a Robot’s "Skin" Be? Designing
Texture-Changing Skin for Human-Robot Social Interaction. In Transactions on
Human-Robot Interaction (THRI), Special Issue on Designing the Robot Body: Critical
Perspectives on Affective Embodied Interaction . ACM (Manuscript accepted, to
appear).
[7] Yuhan Hu, Zhengnan Zhao, Abheek Vimal, and Guy Hoffman. 2018. Soft skin
texture modulation for social robotics. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Soft Robotics (RoboSoft). IEEE, 182–187.
[8] Chiwon Lee, Myungjoon Kim, Yoon Jae Kim, Nhayoung Hong, Seungwan Ryu,
H Jin Kim, and Sungwan Kim. 2017. Soft robot review. International Journal of
Control, Automation and Systems 15, 1 (2017), 3–15.
[9] Philip Moseley, Juan Manuel Florez, Harshal Arun Sonar, Gunjan Agarwal,
William Curtin, and Jamie Paik. 2016. Modeling, design, and development of soft
pneumatic actuators with finite element method. Advanced engineering materials
18, 6 (2016), 978–988.
[10] Maike Paetzel-Prüsmann, Giulia Perugia, and Ginevra Castellano. 2021. The
influence of robot personality on the development of uncanny feelings.Computers
in Human Behavior 120 (2021), 106756.
[11] Robert F Shepherd, Filip Ilievski, Wonjae Choi, Stephen A Morin, Adam A Stokes,
Aaron D Mazzeo, Xin Chen, Michael Wang, and George M Whitesides. 2011.
Multigait soft robot. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 108, 51 (2011),
20400–20403.
[12] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform–the Pneumatic “Raspberry
Pi” for Soft Robotics. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems . 1–6.