What to Design Next: Actuated Materials and Soft Robots for Children
CHRIS HILL, ATLAS Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
RUOJIA SUN, ATLAS Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
ELLEN YI-LUEN DO, ATLAS Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
A growing interest in soft robotics and actuated materials in human-computer interaction (HCI) has generated several projects that
demonstrate the capabilities of pneumatically-actuated robots. For this technology to have an impact on non-researchers, there is a
need to consider how to develop soft pneumatic robots in order to accommodate the abilities and interests of children. We argue that
through designing soft robot kits and applications for children, the field of programmable matter will progress as a more accessible,
playful technology. This workshop paper describes the impacts that soft robotics for children may have on: expanding what materials
and techniques are used in soft robotics, new types of “post-processing” techniques for customizing soft robots, and educational
applications for soft robotics.
ACM Reference Format:
Chris Hill, Ruojia Sun, and Ellen Yi-Luen Do. 2022. What to Design Next: Actuated Materials and Soft Robots for Children . In . ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
Soft robotics as a field in HCI is focused on the design, fabrication, and testing of highly compliant materials. Several
initiatives have grown the soft robotics community through knowledge-sharing initiatives and toolkits [3, 10, 17]. These
resources provide detailed information on the fabrication process to create the hardware system as well as the soft
material. These initiatives have targeted researchers and makers who have the knowledge and tools to fabricate the
system. A focus towards designing these technologies for children, specifically their interests and available materials,
can diversify the types of soft robotic projects that are made.
Computational technologies that integrate the interests of children, their toys, activities, and culture have the
potential to be more accessible and increase participation [ 6]. Traditionally, designing technology for children has
focused on educational benefits, where novel systems have been integrated into classrooms to aid students in learning
design, programming, and fabrication. But children do not spend all their time in classrooms, and these educational
tools are separate from the types of play, tinkering, and making that students do outside of school. Children modify
technology to fit their lives and interests, as designers, it is important to create systems that support a wide range of
interests and skills.
Soft robotic toolkits and applications designed for children could generate several insights that will benefit the field,
including:
• Expanding what materials and techniques are used in soft robotics
• New types of “post-processing” techniques for customizing soft robots
• Educational opportunities for soft robotics
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
CHI ’22 Workshops, April 30 - May 5, 2022 , New Orleans, LA Chris Hill, Ruojia Sun, and Ellen Do
2 OPPORTUNITIES IN DESIGNING SOFT ROBOTS FOR CHILDREN
2.1 Expanding What Materials and Techniques are Used in Soft Robotics
Creating compliant materials for soft robotics is an involved process that uses fabrication techniques such as 3D
printing, laser cutting, and molding. While there has been an increase in availability of these soft robotic prototyping
technologies [9], designing material morphology with these tools requires technical expertise and extensive time,
making it impractical for children. This leads to the question: if children are unable to design their own soft actuated
materials using predominant fabrication techniques, how can we support them to create soft robots? Efforts have been
made to create soft robot construction kits for children with modular components [12]. Software tools for modeling
and simulating soft robot actuators [ 2] could also assist in the process. We propose focusing on the materials that
children already have at their disposal, this option presents an interesting opportunity for soft robotics, as these hacked
materials could lead to novel types of actuation and new form considerations. Several of the toys found within a child’s
classroom or home are similar to materials used in research and commercial soft robotics projects. One could imagine
students cutting open sensory stress balls to create simple jamming interfaces, modifying party horns to create linear
actuators, or adding a balloon to a hoberman sphere to create a shape changing exoskeleton (Figure 1).
Fig. 1. Example of toys that a child would have access to for hacking into soft robots. At left (a): a sensory stress ball. In middle (b): an
extendable party horn. At right (c) a hoberman toy sphere.
Members in the maker community have generated tutorials that use low cost craft materials to fabricate compliant
materials. Two tutorials were created by a student who identified that soft robotics has barriers related to cost and access
to fabrication tools [7, 8]. In response they developed a low-cost soft robotic gripper that is based on a fiber-reinforced
actuator research project [15]. The project demonstrates similar capabilities while also being made using cardboard,
hot-glue, curling ribbon, and other craft materials (Figure 2). The other project uses a ball point pen to fabricate a
soft robotic tentacle (Figure 3). These projects demonstrate the resourceful fabrication methods that do not require
professional tools.
2
What to Design Next: Actuated Materials and Soft Robots for Children CHI ’22 Workshops, April 30 - May 5, 2022 , New Orleans, LA
Fig. 2. Soft robot fiber-reinforced gripper made by Instructables user “Harrison_89”. At left (a): silicone casted in a cardboard mold. At
right (b): The gripper being used to pick up a rubik’s cube.
Fig. 3. Soft robot tentacle made by Instructables user “Harrison_8”. At left (a): silicone injected into a modified ballpoint pen mold. At
right (b): The Tentacle being actuated by a syringe.
2.2 New Types of “Post-Processing” Techniques for Customizing Soft Robots
Using current soft robotic systems and materials, students can only create a certain type of project. By putting this
technology in the hands of children, we could see an exciting intellectual shift towards morphing soft robotics into
new types of artifacts. For example, imagine a child that has an interest in the tropical ocean and wants to use soft
robotics to create a realistic model of a puffer fish. Current soft robotics systems and tools are not particularly good at
supporting this project: you can convincingly create the inflatable movement of the fish, but it will not look much like
its real-life counterpart.
What new tools can we create to assist in the embellishment of soft robots? There could be new techniques to embed
scales or fur onto the surface of a soft robot. Tools to design and embed simple structures into soft robots could enable
storytelling opportunities and immersive interactions. The point being that by designing for children and their interests
of decorating and embellishment, soft robotics becomes a design medium. Children like making things that move [14],
they also value the ability to combine their creations with a range of craft and other materials. This enables them to
customize their creation, make it unique, and representative of the interaction they envision.
3
CHI ’22 Workshops, April 30 - May 5, 2022 , New Orleans, LA Chris Hill, Ruojia Sun, and Ellen Do
2.3 Educational Opportunities for Soft Robotics
By designing for children, we expand soft robotics toward education and play. We propose two scenarios where soft
robotics could benefit student during learning: toolkits and tangible learning tools. Soft robotic toolkits have been used
to teach materials science and mechanical engineering concepts to children [11, 12, 18], a majority of which focus on
fabricating the material and using syringes to actuate the robot. We propose extending these learning opportunities by
adding computation. Systems as simple as a servo-driven pump have the potential to interest students in programming.
Once the student has learned to control the pumps they may move onto integrating pressure sensors or additional soft
actuators to create more complex systems. Another opportunity is to modify current soft robotics actuation toolkits to
be used with popular block-based programming languages like Scratch [4] or MakeCode [1], which can simplify the
programming process for beginners and promote tinkering [16].
Workshops and classrooms that utilize soft robotic learning tools could create unique educational experiences for
students. For example, a planetary sciences workshop aimed at teaching students about gravitational forces could
utilize a wearable jamming display to constraint the elbow joints of the wearer, creating different types of movement
sensations [13]. Students who are learning to calculate areas and volumes of various geometries may deepen their
physical intuition for these mathematical formulas using pneumatic displays, for example, engaging with how a cone
has one-third the volume of a cylinder with the same height and radius through the amount of air required to pressurize
each geometry. Learning opportunities that utilize soft robotics could benefit students by providing a tangible learning
that connects knowledge building with direct experience [5].
3 CONCLUSION
The novel materiality and nature-inspired design process of soft robotics is aligned with the possibility of imaginative
and playful interactions for children. Soft robotics, as a younger field, is still presented with fundamental challenges
both in terms of the technology and its accessibility. We see this as an opportunity to probe more creative, perhaps
imperfect, and surprising designs. Through the practice of designing soft robots for children, we can provide new
insights for the field of soft robotics.
4 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is sponsored in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation through grant IIS-2040489.
REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. MakeCode. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/makecode
[2] [n.d.]. Modeling, Simulation and Control of Soft Robots with SOFA. https://softroboticstoolkit.com/sofa
[3] [n.d.]. Pneuduino. http://pneuduino.org/
[4] [n.d.]. Scratch. https://scratch.mit.edu/
[5] Lucia Bigozzi, Christian Tarchi, Carlo Fiorentini, Paola Falsini, and Federica Stefanelli. 2018. The Influence of Teaching Approach on Students’
Conceptual Learning in Physics. Frontiers in Psychology 9 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02474
[6] Maneksha DuMont and Victor Lee. 2012. Material pets, virtual spaces, isolated designers: How collaboration may be unintentionally constrained in
the design of tangible computational crafts. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series (06 2012). https://doi.org/10.1145/2307096.2307136
[7] Harrison_89. [n.d.]. DIY Soft Robotic Tentacle. https://www.instructables.com/DIY-Soft-Robotic-Tentacle/
[8] Harrison_89. [n.d.]. Soft Robotic Grabber (No 3D Printer Required). https://www.instructables.com/Soft-Robotic-Grabber-No-3D-Printer-Required/
[9] Dónal Holland, Evelyn Park, Panagiotis Polygerinos, Gareth Bennett, and Conor Walsh. 2014. The Soft Robotics Toolkit: Shared Resources for
Research and Design. Soft Robotics 1 (09 2014), 224–230. https://doi.org/10.1089/soro.2014.0010
[10] Donal Padraic Holland, Colette Abah, Marielena Velasco-Enriquez, Maxwell Herman, Gareth J. Bennett, Emir Augusto Vela, and Conor James
Walsh. 2017. The Soft Robotics Toolkit: Strategies for Overcoming Obstacles to the Wide Dissemination of Soft-Robotic Hardware. IEEE Robotics
4
What to Design Next: Actuated Materials and Soft Robots for Children CHI ’22 Workshops, April 30 - May 5, 2022 , New Orleans, LA
Automation Magazine 24, 1 (2017), 57–64. https://doi.org/10.1109/MRA.2016.2639067
[11] Andrew Jackson, Nathan Mentzer, and Rebecca Kramerbottiglio. 2020. soft robotics as emerging technologies: preparing students for future work
through soft robot design experiences. Technology and Engineering Teacher 79, 6 (2020), 8–14.
[12] Christopher Kopic and Kristian Gohlke. 2016. InflatiBits: A Modular Soft Robotic Construction Kit for Children. 723–728. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2839462.2872962
[13] Takashi Mitsuda, Sachiko Kuge, Masato Wakabayashi, and Sadao Kawamura. 2002. Wearable Force Display Using a Particle Mechanical Constraint.
Presence 11, 6 (2002), 569–577. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474602321050703
[14] Hyunjoo Oh, Sherry Hsi, Michael Eisenberg, and Mark D. Gross. 2018. Paper Mechatronics: Present and Future (IDC ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 389–395. https://doi.org/10.1145/3202185.3202761
[15] Panagiotis Polygerinos, Zheng Wang, Johannes T. B. Overvelde, Kevin C. Galloway, Robert J. Wood, Katia Bertoldi, and Conor Walsh James. 2015.
Modeling of Soft Fiber-Reinforced Bending Actuators. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 31 (2015), 778–789.
[16] Mitchel Resnick, John Maloney, Andrés Hernández, Natalie Rusk, Evelyn Eastmond, Karen Brennan, Amon Millner, Eric Rosenbaum, Jay Silver,
Brian Silverman, and Yasmin Kafai. 2009. Scratch: Programming for Everyone. Commun. ACM 52 (11 2009), 60–67.
[17] Ali Shtarbanov. 2021. FlowIO Development Platform – the Pneumatic “Raspberry Pi” for Soft Robotics . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451513
[18] Jiawei Zhang, Andrew Jackson, Nathan Mentzer, and Rebecca Kramer. 2017. A Modular, Reconfigurable Mold for a Soft Robotic Gripper Design
Activity. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 4 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2017.00046
5